Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galunisertib inhibits ovarian cancer cell fibrosis and metastasis
in vitro


Background:In ovarian cancer (OC), the intraperitoneal fibrosis that
accompanies metastasis is a common scenario and associated with
significant morbidity and gut dysfunction. Accumulating evidences
indicate that Transforming Growth Factor (TGF-) signaling pathway plays a
key role in cancer associated fibrosis and metastasis. Several TGF-
inhibitors, including Galunisertib (LY2157299) which is a TGF- receptor I
inhibitor, are currently in clinical trials for fibrosis-related diseases
and cancer. Our hypothesis is that targeted anti-cancer therapies can
block the growth and spread of cancer or specifically address the
fibrosis accompanying metastatic peritoneal cancer. In this study, we
investigated the efficacy of Galunisertib in inhibiting OC fibrosis and
metastasis in vitro.Methods:Five OC cell lines, including SKOV3ip, HeyA8,
OVCAR8, OV2008, and PEO4, and one cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF) cell
line, TRS3, were tested in this study. We utilized a co-culture system
that has successfully been used to study the interactions between cancer
cells and local environment, including CAFs. Twenty-three candidate TGF-
signaling- and fibrosis-related genes were selected based on previous
studies. RNA and protein from both fibroblast cells and OC cells were
collected for RT-qPCR and western blot analysis. MTT assay, Wound healing
assay and Matrigel invasion assay were used to study OC cell
proliferation, migration and invasion. Chou-Talalay assays were performed
to study the interactions between Galunisertib and Carboplatin and
Paclitaxel.Results:RT-qPCR results showed that Galunisertib treatment
suppresses the expression of both TGF- receptor I and TGF-1 which is the
most abundant isoform of TGF- in OC. Western blot results showed that
Galunisertib treatment reverses the TGF-1-induced SMAD2/3
phosphorylation, confirming the efficacy of Galunisertib in TGF-
signaling pathway blockage. Intriguingly, Galunisertib treatment inhibits
the expression of candidate fibrosis-related genes, like ACTA2, TIMP3,
COL5A1, COL11A1, and VCAN in both OC and CAF cells. Would healing and
Transwell invasion assay also demonstrated that Galunisertib treatment
effectively reduces both basal and TGF-1-induced cell migration and
invasion (pBackground:In ovarian cancer (OC), the intraperitoneal
fibrosis that accompanies metastasis is a common scenario and associated
with significant morbidity and gut dysfunction. Accumulating evidences
indicate that Transforming Growth Factor (TGF-) signaling pathway plays a
key role in cancer associated fibrosis and metastasis. Several TGF-
inhibitors, including Galunisertib (LY2157299) which is a TGF- receptor I
inhibitor, are currently in clinical trials for fibrosis-related diseases
and cancer. Our hypothesis is that targeted anti-cancer therapies can
block the growth and spread of cancer or specifically address the
fibrosis accompanying metastatic peritoneal cancer. In this study, we
investigated the efficacy of Galunisertib in inhibiting OC fibrosis and
metastasis in vitro.Methods:Five OC cell lines, including SKOV3ip, HeyA8,
OVCAR8, OV2008, and PEO4, and one cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF) cell
line, TRS3, were tested in this study. We utilized a co-culture system
that has successfully been used to study the interactions between cancer
cells and local environment, including CAFs. Twenty-three candidate TGF-
signaling- and fibrosis-related genes were selected based on previous
studies. RNA and protein from both fibroblast cells and OC cells were
collected for RT-qPCR and western blot analysis. MTT assay, Wound healing
assay and Matrigel invasion assay were used to study OC cell
proliferation, migration and invasion. Chou-Talalay assays were performed
to study the interactions between Galunisertib and Carboplatin and
Paclitaxel.Results:RT-qPCR results showed that Galunisertib treatment
suppresses the expression of both TGF- receptor I and TGF-1 which is the
most abundant isoform of TGF- in OC. Western blot results showed that
Galunisertib treatment reverses the TGF-1-induced SMAD2/3
phosphorylation, confirming the efficacy of Galunisertib in TGF-
signaling pathway blockage. Intriguingly, Galunisertib treatment inhibits
the expression of candidate fibrosis-related genes, like ACTA2, TIMP3,
COL5A1, COL11A1, and VCAN in both OC and CAF cells. Would healing and
Transwell invasion assay also demonstrated that Galunisertib treatment
effectively reduces both basal and TGF-1-induced cell migration and
invasion (p<0.05). MTT assay showed that Galunisertib is able to inhibit
the proliferation of both OC and CAFs cells with IC50 values range from
100-400 m. Additionally, Galunisertib shows strong synergistic effects
with both Carboplatin and Paclitaxel in Chou-Talalay
assays.Conclusion:Galunisertib treatment suppresses the expression of
TGF--dependent fibrosis-related genes from OC cell lines and CAFs.
Coincident with this inhibition of fibrosis related genes, galunisrtib
reduces cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. These data suggest
that targeting the TGF- pathway is a viable therapeutic approach to
reduce both symptoms related to OC-related fibrosis and cancer metastasis
in OC.

