Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular features of hepatocellular carcinoma arising from
non-alcoholic fatty liver


(Background)The incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) arising from
non-alcoholic fatty liver (NAFL) has been recently increasing according
to increase of patients having metabolic syndrome. HCC, which shows
steatosis, cellular ballooning, Mallory-Denk bodies, inflammation and
fibrosis in cancer tissue, are recognized as steatohepatitic HCC
(SH-HCC). This HCC phenotype is more frequently found in NAFL patients
than in viral-hepatitic patients.(Purpose)The purpose of this study is to
elucidate molecular features of SH-HCC with NAFL background.(Methods)To
profile SH-HCC-related genes, mRNA expression patterns in SH-HCCs were
compared with those in viral hepatitis HCCs by RNA array. RNA expression
of the identified SH-HCC related gene was analyzed in three human liver
carcinoma cell lines (HepG2, Huh7, and HLE) in normal conditioned medium.
By mimicking the lipid-rich environment, these cell lines were also
cultured in the presence of saturated (palmitic or stearic acid,
recognized as endoplasmic reticulum stressors) or unsaturated fatty acids
(oleic acid: OA). To address the role of SH-HCC-related gene, cell
proliferation and apoptosis were assessed in the presence or absence of
fatty acids, by knock-down of the objective gene using siRNA.(Results)(1)
Caveolin (cav)-1 and -2 were identified as SH-HCC related genes (1.63 and
1.58 fold expression of cav-1 and -2, respectively) by RNA microarray
analysis.(2) HLE and Huh7 showed high and low expression of both cav-1
and -2 mRNA, whereas HepG2 did not express either on qRT-PCR.(3) In the
presence of OA, HepG2 and Huh7 did not well proliferate, whereas HLE cell
proliferation increased with concentration of OA and culture duration.(4)
Knock-down of cav-1 and -2 canceled OA-induced increase of cell
proliferation. In the same condition, expression of cleaved caspase 3 was
increased, suggesting the promotion of apoptosis.(Consideration)Cav-1 and
-2, the important protein for endocytosis and cellular signaling, are
highly expressed in SH-HCC. These proteins would increase cell
proliferation and inhibit apoptosis in the presence of unsaturated fatty
acids, presumably by using these fatty acids as energy source or by
caveolae-related anti-apoptotic process.

