Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diffusion-weighted imaging of bone metastases as treatment
response biomarker in prostate cancer


INTRODUCTION: Response assessment of bone metastases (BM) remains a
challenge for drug development in metastatic castration resistant
prostate cancer (mCRPC) as standard imaging techniques, computed
tomography and bone scintigraphy, fail to characterize BM.
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) is a functional MRI technique that
studies the motion of water molecules within a tissue informing on
cellularity. We hypothesized that changes in whole body (WB) DWI informs
on BM response to treatment in mCRPC.METHODS: We conducted a phase II
trial of the PARP inhibitor olaparib in mCRPC (TOPARP-A; CRUK/11/029);
the primary endpoint was response rate defined using RECIST 1.1, PSA
falls of 50% and conversion of circulating tumour cell (CTC) counts from
5 to INTRODUCTION: Response assessment of bone metastases (BM) remains a
challenge for drug development in metastatic castration resistant
prostate cancer (mCRPC) as standard imaging techniques, computed
tomography and bone scintigraphy, fail to characterize BM.
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) is a functional MRI technique that
studies the motion of water molecules within a tissue informing on
cellularity. We hypothesized that changes in whole body (WB) DWI informs
on BM response to treatment in mCRPC.METHODS: We conducted a phase II
trial of the PARP inhibitor olaparib in mCRPC (TOPARP-A; CRUK/11/029);
the primary endpoint was response rate defined using RECIST 1.1, PSA
falls of 50% and conversion of circulating tumour cell (CTC) counts from
5 to <5. Optional WB-DWI in patients (pt) was performed prior to starting
olaparib and after 12 weeks (w) of treatment on a 1.5 T MRI (Siemens
Avanto). Images were analyzed with open-access imaging software (Osirix
v5.6). Areas of DWI signal abnormality consistent with BM in the axial
skeleton (C4 to mid-thigh) were delineated. We estimated disease volume
and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), a parameter derived from DWI
correlated with cellularity. BM volume and median ADC (mADC) changes
between baseline and 12w were associated with binary response to
treatment using Mann-Whitney tests and logistic regression; associations
with best percentage PSA and CTC change after treatment were assessed
using Spearman's correlation.RESULTS: Overall, 33/42 pt consented to the
WB-DWI substudy of whom 21 had WB-DWI at baseline and at 12w. Of these
29% (6/21) were classified as responders to olaparib as per the primary
endpoint definition and had not progressed prior to 12w. At baseline,
median CTC count was 46 CTC/7.5ml blood and median PSA was 411 ng/ml for
this cohort. When assessing all the areas of DWI signal abnormality,
median volume of BM per patient was 445ml and mADC was 782 x10-6 mm2/s.
Baseline CTC counts and PSA were significantly associated with volume of
BM ( = 0.59, p = 0.005; = 0.64, p = 0.002 respectively). All pts who
responded to olaparib showed a decrease in volume of BM (median -41.1%,
range -58.8%, -6.3%), whilst in non-responders a decrease was not
observed in any pt (median 20.7%, range 0.0%, 76.9%); the difference
between responders and non-responders was statistically significant (p =
0.001). Increases in mADC after 12 weeks of treatment were associated
with increased odds of response (Odds Ratio: 1.08, 95% CI 1.00, 1.15, p =
0.04). Additionally, we detected a significant positive association
between changes in volume of BM estimated by DWI and best percentage
change in PSA and CTC ( = 0.63, p = 0.002 and = 0.77, pINTRODUCTION:
Response assessment of bone metastases (BM) remains a challenge for drug
development in metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) as
standard imaging techniques, computed tomography and bone scintigraphy,
fail to characterize BM. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) is a functional
MRI technique that studies the motion of water molecules within a tissue
informing on cellularity. We hypothesized that changes in whole body (WB)
DWI informs on BM response to treatment in mCRPC.METHODS: We conducted a
phase II trial of the PARP inhibitor olaparib in mCRPC (TOPARP-A;
CRUK/11/029); the primary endpoint was response rate defined using RECIST
1.1, PSA falls of 50% and conversion of circulating tumour cell (CTC)
counts from 5 to <5. Optional WB-DWI in patients (pt) was performed prior
to starting olaparib and after 12 weeks (w) of treatment on a 1.5 T MRI
(Siemens Avanto). Images were analyzed with open-access imaging software
(Osirix v5.6). Areas of DWI signal abnormality consistent with BM in the
axial skeleton (C4 to mid-thigh) were delineated. We estimated disease
volume and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), a parameter derived from
DWI correlated with cellularity. BM volume and median ADC (mADC) changes
between baseline and 12w were associated with binary response to
treatment using Mann-Whitney tests and logistic regression; associations
with best percentage PSA and CTC change after treatment were assessed
using Spearman's correlation.RESULTS: Overall, 33/42 pt consented to the
WB-DWI substudy of whom 21 had WB-DWI at baseline and at 12w. Of these
29% (6/21) were classified as responders to olaparib as per the primary
endpoint definition and had not progressed prior to 12w. At baseline,
median CTC count was 46 CTC/7.5ml blood and median PSA was 411 ng/ml for
this cohort. When assessing all the areas of DWI signal abnormality,
median volume of BM per patient was 445ml and mADC was 782 x10-6 mm2/s.
Baseline CTC counts and PSA were significantly associated with volume of
BM ( = 0.59, p = 0.005; = 0.64, p = 0.002 respectively). All pts who
responded to olaparib showed a decrease in volume of BM (median -41.1%,
range -58.8%, -6.3%), whilst in non-responders a decrease was not
observed in any pt (median 20.7%, range 0.0%, 76.9%); the difference
between responders and non-responders was statistically significant (p =
0.001). Increases in mADC after 12 weeks of treatment were associated
with increased odds of response (Odds Ratio: 1.08, 95% CI 1.00, 1.15, p =
0.04). Additionally, we detected a significant positive association
between changes in volume of BM estimated by DWI and best percentage
change in PSA and CTC ( = 0.63, p = 0.002 and = 0.77, p<0.001
respectively).CONCLUSION: Decrease in volume and increase in mADC of BM
assessed by WB-DWI are indicators of response to olaparib in BM from
mCRPC. These data require validation but support the use of WB-DWI for
assessing BM during treatment.

