Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PHF20 induced necrotic like cell death mediated by ROS via
enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis


The importance of PHD finger protein 20 (PHF20) in the cellular process
is recently emerging as a regulator for the p53 and NF-kB signaling as
well as the reprograming process of induced pluripotent stem cell. In
this study, we have provided the clear evidence that PHF20 exhibit the
novel function in tumorigenesis by regulating the mitochondria
biogenesis. Overexpression of PHF20 increases mitochondria biogenesis via
up-regulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor- coactivator
1- (PGC1-) in HCT116 cells. PHF20 overexpression enhances mitochondrial
respiratory capacity and oxygen consumption, leading to the accumulation
of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Accumulated ROS by PHF20 causes the
necrotic like cell death in HCT116 cells. The measurement of
mitochondrial ROS in the cells expressing PHF20 revealed that excessive
production of mitochondrial ROS facilitates the formation of
mitochondrial permeability transition pore, resulting in the loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential. PHF20-mediated ROS accumulation damages
DNA and leads to over-activation of PARP but not caspase. Antioxidants
and PARP-1 inhibitor are able to rescue PHF20 induced cell death, whereas
z-VAD, pan-caspase inhibitor, had no effects. Immunohistochemical
analysis of various human cancer revealed that PHF20 expression is highly
elevated in most of tumor compared to normal tissue. Taken together,
PHF20 appears to be tumor-specific antigen and PHF20-mediated PGC1-
upregulation is responsible for the elevation of intracellular ROS
generation, resulting the necrotic like cell death. Thus, this study
provided the new concept for treating glioma patients and novel
pharmacological target in various cancers including glioblastoma and
hepatocellular carcinoma

