Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) is a candidate
therapeutic target for breast cancers


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) represents a subgroup of breast
cancers associated with the most aggressive clinical behavior. No
targeted therapy is currently available for the treatment of patients
with TNBC. In the present study, we found that Protein Arginine
Methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) is overexpressed in TNBC at the mRNA level.
At the protein level, PRMT1 is overexpressed in all breast cancer
subtypes compared to normal breast tissues. The depletion of PRMT1 using
siRNA in breast cancer cell lines triggered apoptosis, reduced cell
viability and the ability to form colonies in an anchorage-independent
manner. Treatment with a PRMT1 inhibitor blocked proliferation
specifically in breast cancer cells, with no effect in normal breast
cells. Importantly, the expression of PRMT1 is an indicator of prognosis
and response to treatment specifically in TNBC patients. To address the
cellular pathways regulated by PRMT1, we identified its protein partners
by mass spectrometry and the transcriptomic changes following its
depletion in TNBC cell lines. Interestingly, we found that PRMT1 directly
activates key oncogenic pathways. Furthermore, we found a synergistic
interaction between PRMT1 inhibitors and inhibitors for some of those
pathways. We show that PRMT1 activity is necessary for breast cancer cell
survival and oncogenic pathway activation. Altogether, our results point
out PRMT1 as an emerging target for the treatment of breast cancers.

