Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Periodic fasting mimicking diet delays cancer development and
progression


Dietary intake and composition can have profound effects on aging and
age-related pathologies including cancer. As such, studies of fasting
(the complete withdrawal of food) and dietary restriction (DR, generally
described as a 20- 40% reduction in calories) have contributed to the
understanding of the relationship between nutrients, cellular aging,
cancer development and cancer cell survival. DR may only be feasible in
delaying tumor development but might not present an effective treatment
modality due to the time required to achieve beneficial effects. Further,
chronic DR may also have negative impacts on wound healing, which could
be detrimental in patients undergoing surgery. Our findings in yeast
indicated that starvation decreases age-dependent mutations whereas in
mouse xenograft tumor models fasting alone can be as effective as
chemotherapy drugs in delaying the progression of certain tumor types, in
part through the reduction of extracellular glucose and IGF-1
concentration/signaling. Fasting, although results indicate efficacy as a
treatment option, on the other hand may not be feasible for patients at
risk for undernutrition or cachexia.To address the need for a dietary
based intervention that both delays cancer development and progression,
we developed a fasting-mimicking diet (FMD) to ensure micronutrient
supply and tested its effectiveness in rodent models. Periodic bi-weekly
FMD cycles had a significant impact on the development and progression of
multiple cancer models while allowing the preservation of lean body mass
even at old age and extending longevity in healthspan study. As a
treatment modality, FMD cycles alone significantly reduced tumor
progression and sensitized various cancer models to chemotherapeutic
drugs.

