Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of cancer stem cells derived from
drug-resistant melanoma


BRAF kinase is a key intermediate in the MAP kinase pathway, which is
associated with cell growth and proliferation. BRAFV600E activating
mutation is found in 50-60% of all melanomas and 7% of all cancer
malignancies. Despite an unprecedented initial response, patients treated
with a highly effective BRAF inhibitor, vemurafenib (FDA approved 2011),
can acquire drug resistance in as little as 6-9 months. Epigenetically
driven epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a hallmark of cancer
stem-like cells (CSCs), is a potential mechanism that melanomas employ to
evade targeted therapy. We are investigating molecular alterations due to
EMT in parental and vemurafenib-resistant melanoma sublines.
Characterization of differential protein expression in parental and
resistant cell lines through immunocytochemical, flow cytometric, and
immunoblot analysis has indicated that EMT could confer drug resistance
that prolongs survival of malignant melanomas. Furthermore, comparison of
parental to isogenic resistant melanoma cell lines showed upregulated
expression of EMT-related biomarkers that may be suggestive of the
development of CSCs. These CSCs may serve as progenitor cells for
therapy-resistant sublines in a heterogeneous melanoma population. Our
research has identified notable EMT biomarkers in CSCs that can be used
as novel targets for diagnosis and treatment of tumor resistance in
melanoma patients.

