Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair genes aberrations in germline DNA in metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer patients


INTRODUCTION: DNA repair defects are found in mCRPC and are
therapeutically actionable; germline BRCA mutation-associated (gBRCA)
prostate cancer has a poor prognosis. We hypothesized that metastatic
castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) is enriched for germline DNA
repair mutations and that these may be relevant to patient
outcome.METHODS: Targeted-sequencing for DNA repair genes was conducted
in germline DNA from patients consenting to 3 clinical trials between
2013-2015. Germline DNA was extracted from saliva or buccal swabs using
the Oragene kit; libraries were constructed using a customized Qiagen
panel and sequenced using the Illumina MiSeq. Family history and clinical
data were prospectively collected. For time to event analyses unadjusted
Cox regression models were used and comparisons were made using log-rank
tests.RESULTS: Germline samples from 154 mCRPC patients were available.
Median age at diagnosis was 61years (y), median time to
castration-resistance was 14.5 months (m) and median overall survival
(OS) from initial diagnosis of prostate cancer was 106.8m; 69% (91/131;
24 N/A) of patients were initially diagnosed with Gleason8 tumors.
130/154 (84.4%) and 131/154 (85.0%) received Docetaxel and Abiraterone
respectively. Of 154 patients, 4 were previously known to be gBRCA2
mutation carriers and were removed from the prevalence analysis but
included in the clinical analyses; 22/150 (14.7%, 95%CI 9.4-21.4%)
harboured a truncating or frameshift mutation in a DNA repair gene (9
BRCA2, 6%; 4 ATM, 2.7%; 2 PALB2, 1.3%, 1 each for CHEK2, FANCI, MRE11A,
NBN, RAD51C, RAD51D and MSH6). Overall, patients with any germline DNA
repair aberrations had a worse median OS (75.8 vs 106.8 m; log-rank p =
0.04). Time to resistance to primary hormonal ablation was shorter
specifically for gBRCA2 mutations carriers (11.0 vs 14.8 m; log-rank p =
0.01) but not for non-BRCA2 repair aberrations. Age at diagnosis was
similar in patients with or without DNA repair germline mutations (median
61.3 vs 61.7y, Mann-Whitney p = 0.41) as well as frequency of Gleason8
tumors (16/21 [76%] vs 75/109 [68%]; Mann-Whitney p = 0.23) Response
rates to Docetaxel (14/18 [77.8%] vs 64/94 [68.1%]; Fisher exact p =
0.67) and Abiraterone (10/21 [47.6%] vs 44/94 [46.8%]; Fisher exact p =
0.73) were similar among individuals with and without mutations. Family
cancer history was collected in 125/154 cases (81%). While having cases
of ovarian/prostate/breast/pancreas cancers in these patients families
associated with a higher likelihood of finding a germline mutation (Odds
Ratio 3.36, p = 0.03), 5 of 68 (7.4%) men with no cases of
ovarian/prostate/breast/pancreas cancers registered in their families
carried a germline mutation in a DNA repair gene.CONCLUSIONS: mCRPC is
enriched for patients with germline mutations in DNA repair genes (15%),
with 6% having gBRCA2 mutation. Germline DNA repair aberrations are
associated with a worse prognosis from mCRPC.

