Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma levels of miRNA-155 as a powerful diagnostic marker for
dedifferentiated liposarcoma


PURPOSE: Atypic lipomatous tumors (ALT) and dedifferentiated liposarcomas
(DDLS) are closely related liposarcoma subtypes, often difficult to
distinguish but they exhibit an entirely different clinical outcome.
Recently discovered regulatory functions of miRNAs in liposarcoma
progression prompted us to investigate miRNAs as potential diagnostic
biomarkers in liposarcoma with a main focus on circulating miRNAs for
fast and reliable differential diagnosis.PATIENTS AND METHODS: Tumor and
blood samples of 35 patients with lipomatous lesions collected between
June 2011 and September 2014 were analyzed by qRT-PCR. They included 10
lipomas, 7 ALT, 5 DDLS and 13 myxoid liposarcomas (MLS). Ten samples of
normal fat tissue and blood from 20 healthy volunteers were used as
controls.RESULTS: A meta-analysis of public data on miRNA expression in
liposarcoma revealed 9 miRNAs with potential diagnostic power. Out of
these, miRNA-155 was found significantly elevated in the circulation of
DDLS patients as compared to the plasma levels detected in all other
liposarcoma subtypes and in healthy subjects. miRNA-155 levels in the
plasma samples correlated significantly (r = 0.41,p = 0.02) with those in
corresponding tumor extracts. This correlation was even more pronounced
in an analysis of plasma and tumor extracts of malignant liposarcoma
subtypes alone (r = 0.51,p = 0.02). Receiver operating characteristic
analysis indicated that plasma miRNA-155 levels have a high diagnostic
accuracy for distinguishing DDLS from healthy subjects (AUC = 0.91,p =
0.005) and from lipomas (AUC = 0.86,p = 0.02), MLS (AUC = 0.92,p = 0.006)
and most importantly ALT (AUC = 0.91,p = 0.01) patients.CONCLUSION: In
conclusion, this study identified miRNA-155 as a first blood biomarker
for the differential diagnosis of DDLS.

