Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC1: A metabolic regulator in triple-negative breast cancer


Breast cancer, the second leading cause of cancer deaths in women, is the
most common cancer among North American women, accounting for nearly 1 in
3 cancer cases diagnosed in the U.S. women. Triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC) subtype accounts for approximately 15-25% of all breast cancer
cases and has an increased incidence of metastasis, high recurrence
within 1-3 years and a high mortality rate. Therefore, identifying
factors that facilitate tumor growth and metastases have the potential to
serve as novel molecular targets for breast cancer therapy. Mucin1
(MUC1), a glycoprotein associated with chemoresistance, is aberrantly
overexpressed in TNBC and facilitates growth and metastasis of TNBC
cells. This occurrence can be partially attributed to MUC1 interaction
with hypoxia-inducible factor alpha (HIF1), a key regulator of
glycolysis. As metastasis is the leading cause of cancer related deaths,
this process relies on the ability of tumor cells to adapt to the
changing nutrient levels in the surrounding stroma. In the present study
we examined how signaling through MUC1 facilitates metabolic phenotype in
TNBC; thus facilitating tumor growth and metastasis. Our results indicate
that MUC1 expression facilitates glucose and glutamine uptake in a panel
of TNBC cell lines. Furthermore, metabolomic analysis through liquid
chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry approach revealed that
MUC1 expression modulates metabolite levels in glycolysis, pentose
phosphate pathway and TCA cycle in TNBC cells. Thus, our results support
the notion that MUC1 serves as a metabolic regulator in TNBC,
facilitating metabolic reprogramming that influences growth of TNBC.

