Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression studies of RBBP6 in breast and cervical cancer suggests
a role in apoptosis activation


Ubiquitin-like DWNN domain and RING finger-like domain presence on
Retinoblastoma Binding protein 6 (RBBP6), is linked to its function as
cancer promoting gene through p53 degradation via its p53-binding domain.
RBBP6 bind and regulate the expression of p53 and pRB in the cell
machinery implicates RBBP6 in cell proliferation during cancer
development (Moela et al 2014). Studies indicate that overexpression of
the mouse spliced variants led to apoptosis and cell cycle arrest whilst
deregulation in mice led to embryonic lethality followed by p53
accumulation and a widespread apoptosis (Li et al., 2007). In this study,
focuses on determining the expression pattern of RBBP6 in human tissue
models of breast and cervical cancer. The study further aims to analyze
apoptosis and cell cycle following either knockdown or overexpression of
RBBP6 coupled to treatment with potential anticancer compounds,
camptothecin and GABA. Quantitative analysis by qPCR in HeLa, SiHa,
MCF-7and MDA-MB-231 cell lines shows that RBBP6 expression is fairly high
in cancer cells when compared to normal lung fibroblast. Following
co-treatment with GABA and cDNA or siRNA, in cDNA treated there was a
reduction in both apoptosis as measured by flow cytometer and TP53
expression while in siRNA there was increased expression of TP53 and
those of Bax and Bak1 which seemed to account for increased apoptosis.
Cell cycle presented increase in G0/G1 and the G2/M following treatment
with siRNA and GABA. GABA alone could not induce a significant increase
in apoptotic cells whereas when combined with siRNA it was able to induce
over 30% apoptosis. These results suggest that RBBP6 might be a cancer
promoting gene.

