Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of cyclin D1-associated kinase activity in the regulation
of autophagy and senescence in gastric cancer cells


Introduction: Cyclin D1 regulates cell cycle progression through its
ability to bind and activate cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6).
Recent work carried out in mammary epithelial cells (MECs) propagated in
vitro has revealed that the functional status of cyclin D1 modulates a
balance between senescence and autophagy, two processes commonly
disrupted in human cancers. Thus, in contrast to the commonly held
assumption that autophagy is an effector process of senescence,
inhibition of autophagy was accompanied by an induction or exacerbation
of senescence in MECs deficient in cyclin D1-associated kinase activity,
a reflection of the pro-survival function of autophagy in these cells.
Materials and methods: In the present study, we set out to confirm these
findings in gastric cancer cell lines (AGS, MKN-45 and KATO III) that may
differ in their ability to induce senescence. To this end, we first
treated AGS (cyclin D1+; pRB+; p53+) cells with Palbociclib (a specific
inhibitor of cyclin D-CDK4/6 complexes), Spautin-1 (a specific inhibitor
of autophagy), or a combination of these drugs, and assessed the effect
of the treatment on the ability of these cells to proliferate or undergo
senescence. Results and discussion: Unlike what was previously reported,
our results suggest that autophagy is not required for the implementation
of the senescent phenotype in AGS cells treated with Palbociclib.
Nonetheless, senescent cells in which autophagy was disrupted were larger
and often displayed multiple nuclei, suggesting the existence of
different senescence programs depending on autophagy function.

