Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of Brk-inhibitors on nondirectional and directed migration
of breast cancer cells


The non-receptor tyrosine kinase Brk (breast tumor kinase, PTK-6) has
been linked to various effects in tumor cells including cell
proliferation, differentiation and migration. Modulation of cellular
signaling occurs due to protein scaffolding and substrate
phosphorylation, while effects depend on cell type and molecular context.
Recent findings suggest, that some hallmark effects of cancer may be
linked to the active kinase whereas inactive Brk seems to be involved in
different physiological processes of epithelial cells. Novel -carboline
derivatives were described previously and identified as Brk inhibitors in
in-vitro testing. We examined the effect of four candidates MK5, MK136,
MK138 and MK150 in breast cancer cell lines regarding Brk as a modulator
of cell migration.Cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 were cultivated as
indicated by the distributor. Inhibition of non-directional migration
over a given period of time was determined by scratch assays barring
proliferation by addition of 50 mM hydroxyurea. The gap was created using
silicon inserts and TScratch software was used to evaluate cell free
surface area. Directional migration was investigated by trans-well assay
utilizing FCS as attractant and an 8 m pore membrane in combination with
xCellingence real time measurement. Statistical evaluation was conducted
using 1-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett's test.In scratch assays samples
incubated with 1 M of each substance showed a larger cell free area after
24 hours for MDA-MB-231 cells and after 30 hours for MDA-MB-46 cells. The
increase was significant in MDA-MB-231 cells for substance MK136
(32.0717.21%, pThe non-receptor tyrosine kinase Brk (breast tumor kinase,
PTK-6) has been linked to various effects in tumor cells including cell
proliferation, differentiation and migration. Modulation of cellular
signaling occurs due to protein scaffolding and substrate
phosphorylation, while effects depend on cell type and molecular context.
Recent findings suggest, that some hallmark effects of cancer may be
linked to the active kinase whereas inactive Brk seems to be involved in
different physiological processes of epithelial cells. Novel -carboline
derivatives were described previously and identified as Brk inhibitors in
in-vitro testing. We examined the effect of four candidates MK5, MK136,
MK138 and MK150 in breast cancer cell lines regarding Brk as a modulator
of cell migration.Cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 were cultivated as
indicated by the distributor. Inhibition of non-directional migration
over a given period of time was determined by scratch assays barring
proliferation by addition of 50 mM hydroxyurea. The gap was created using
silicon inserts and TScratch software was used to evaluate cell free
surface area. Directional migration was investigated by trans-well assay
utilizing FCS as attractant and an 8 m pore membrane in combination with
xCellingence real time measurement. Statistical evaluation was conducted
using 1-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett's test.In scratch assays samples
incubated with 1 M of each substance showed a larger cell free area after
24 hours for MDA-MB-231 cells and after 30 hours for MDA-MB-46 cells. The
increase was significant in MDA-MB-231 cells for substance MK136
(32.0717.21%, p<0.1) and highly significant for MK138 (52.377.00%, pThe
non-receptor tyrosine kinase Brk (breast tumor kinase, PTK-6) has been
linked to various effects in tumor cells including cell proliferation,
differentiation and migration. Modulation of cellular signaling occurs
due to protein scaffolding and substrate phosphorylation, while effects
depend on cell type and molecular context. Recent findings suggest, that
some hallmark effects of cancer may be linked to the active kinase
whereas inactive Brk seems to be involved in different physiological
processes of epithelial cells. Novel -carboline derivatives were
described previously and identified as Brk inhibitors in in-vitro
testing. We examined the effect of four candidates MK5, MK136, MK138 and
MK150 in breast cancer cell lines regarding Brk as a modulator of cell
migration.Cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 were cultivated as
indicated by the distributor. Inhibition of non-directional migration
over a given period of time was determined by scratch assays barring
proliferation by addition of 50 mM hydroxyurea. The gap was created using
silicon inserts and TScratch software was used to evaluate cell free
surface area. Directional migration was investigated by trans-well assay
utilizing FCS as attractant and an 8 m pore membrane in combination with
xCellingence real time measurement. Statistical evaluation was conducted
using 1-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett's test.In scratch assays samples
incubated with 1 M of each substance showed a larger cell free area after
24 hours for MDA-MB-231 cells and after 30 hours for MDA-MB-46 cells. The
increase was significant in MDA-MB-231 cells for substance MK136
(32.0717.21%, p<0.1) and highly significant for MK138 (52.377.00%,
p<0.001) compared to DMSO treated control (7.733.22%). Furthermore, the
effect of MK138 increased in a concentration-dependent manner yielding
consistently highly significant differences at a concentration of 1 M
(36.7714.53%, N = 8 vs. 9.8701.12%, N = 4). MK138 displayed a significant
difference in MDA-MB-468 cells as well (37.2712.56% vs. 10.073.04%, pThe
non-receptor tyrosine kinase Brk (breast tumor kinase, PTK-6) has been
linked to various effects in tumor cells including cell proliferation,
differentiation and migration. Modulation of cellular signaling occurs
due to protein scaffolding and substrate phosphorylation, while effects
depend on cell type and molecular context. Recent findings suggest, that
some hallmark effects of cancer may be linked to the active kinase
whereas inactive Brk seems to be involved in different physiological
processes of epithelial cells. Novel -carboline derivatives were
described previously and identified as Brk inhibitors in in-vitro
testing. We examined the effect of four candidates MK5, MK136, MK138 and
MK150 in breast cancer cell lines regarding Brk as a modulator of cell
migration.Cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 were cultivated as
indicated by the distributor. Inhibition of non-directional migration
over a given period of time was determined by scratch assays barring
proliferation by addition of 50 mM hydroxyurea. The gap was created using
silicon inserts and TScratch software was used to evaluate cell free
surface area. Directional migration was investigated by trans-well assay
utilizing FCS as attractant and an 8 m pore membrane in combination with
xCellingence real time measurement. Statistical evaluation was conducted
using 1-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett's test.In scratch assays samples
incubated with 1 M of each substance showed a larger cell free area after
24 hours for MDA-MB-231 cells and after 30 hours for MDA-MB-46 cells. The
increase was significant in MDA-MB-231 cells for substance MK136
(32.0717.21%, p<0.1) and highly significant for MK138 (52.377.00%,
p<0.001) compared to DMSO treated control (7.733.22%). Furthermore, the
effect of MK138 increased in a concentration-dependent manner yielding
consistently highly significant differences at a concentration of 1 M
(36.7714.53%, N = 8 vs. 9.8701.12%, N = 4). MK138 displayed a significant
difference in MDA-MB-468 cells as well (37.2712.56% vs. 10.073.04%,
p<0.01). In transwell experiments MDA-MB-231 cells showed significantly
impaired migration when incubated with MK138 and MK150. For MK138 a
concentration-dependent effect was found similar to the scratch assay. In
cell line MDA-MB-468 the inhibitor MK138 accounted for a significant
decrease in directional migration as well.Our findings indicate an
influence of pharmacological Brk-inhibition on the migratory ability of
breast cancer cells. These effects were evident for all tested substances
and constantly significant and concentration-dependent for MK138 making
unspecific effects unlikely. The mechanism of Brk activity in modulation
of migratory processes needs to be further addressed to better understand
and exploit its influence on tumor cell migration, dissemination and
metastasis.This work was supported by the German Research Foundation
(DFG, Grant No. RI1196/4-1).

