Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of novel benzosuberene-based vascular disrupting agents
(VDA) on diverse tumor lines


Introduction: In developing any new drug, non-invasive assays of efficacy
provide vital insight into activity with respect to dosing and
pharmacodynamics of action. We have previously demonstrated the utility
of dynamic bioluminescence imaging (dBLI) to evaluate VDA activity [1,2].
The current study, which evaluated the vascular-disrupting activity upon
treatment with the promising novel benzosuberene-based agents KGP18 and
KGP265 [structurally inspired by the natural product, combretastatin A-4
(CA4)] led to significantly decreased and delayed light emission
indicative of vascular disruption.Methods: Human breast cancer cells
(MDA-MB-231), prostate cancer cells (PC3), and lung cancer cells (A549)
along with mouse breast tumor 4T1 cells were implanted in male
SCID/Balb/c mice. The dose of KGP265 ranged from 5 to 15 mg/kg and the
well studied VDA combretastatin A-4P (CA4P; 120 mg/kg) was used as
positive control. Dynamic BLI was performed at baseline, 4, 24, 48 and 72
hours after IP administration of each VDA. Fresh D-luciferin was
administered at each time point. As a control, additional tumor bearing
mice were injected with the same volume of saline.Results: Dose
escalation indicated that higher doses produced more effective vascular
shutdown, and doses of 3 mg/kg KGP18 and 7.5 mg/kg KGP265 appeared
optimal, being effective while causing little observable toxicity with
the MBA-MD-231 tumor model. The optimal dose of KGP265 was 5 mg/kg for
4T1, and 10 mg/kg for A549 and PC3. Treatment of the 4T1, PC3 and A549
tumors with the above dose of KGP265 greatly reduced signal output in BLI
images. By 4 hours, about 90% of signal was reduced and the signal stayed
down for the next 48 hours post-injection. In vivo observations were
confirmed by post mortem histology. Treatment with KGP265 led to
significantly decreased and delayed light emission indicative of vascular
disruption in different tumor types. The BLI signal was reduced by 90% at
4 hours compared to baseline. Light emission remained significantly
depressed up to 48 hours and 72 hours, whereas CA4P showed substantial
recovery by 24 hours and further recovery by 48 hours. Meanwhile light
emission was highly consistent following administration of saline as
control with reproducible kinetics and intensities.Conclusion: The
results indicate that KGP18 and KGP265 cause significant vascular
disruption. KGP265 is a phosphorylated prodrug of KGP18; it has enhanced
water solubility, and maintains substantial vascular disrupting efficacy.
Compared to CA4P (optimal dose 120 mg/kg), the new VDAs are effective at
lower doses and achieve similar imaging results, suggesting enhanced
efficacy. We are continuing to explore efficacy and therapeutic response
through combination studies.Acknowledgment: CA4P was kindly provided by
Dr. David Chaplin of OXiGENE. Supported by NIH R01CA140674References:
1.Zhao D et al, FASEB J. 22(7): 2445-2451, 20082.Mason RP et al,
Integrat. Biol., 3: 375-387, 2011

