Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insights into the mechanism of action of NVP-HDM201, a
differentiated and versatile Next-Generation small-molecule inhibitor of
Mdm2, under evaluation in phase I clinical trials


Activation of p53 by blocking p53-Mdm2 interaction using small-molecule
inhibitors is being pursued as a promising cancer therapeutic strategy in
p53 wild-type tumors. Here, we report the identification of NVP-HDM201, a
novel, highly potent and selective inhibitor of the p53-Mdm2 interaction,
with optimized drug-like properties allowing a versatile use with regard
to route of administration, dose and scheduling. We determined the
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and efficacy relationship of
NVP-HDM201 with various dosing schedules in xenograft bearing mouse and
rat models. NVP-HDM201 administered either daily at a low dose or once at
a high dose revealed a differentiated engagement of the p53 molecular
response. In contrast to the daily low dose treatment regimen, the single
high dose NVP-HDM201 regimen resulted in a rapid and dramatic induction
of p53-dependent PUMA expression and apoptosis. This was consistent with
the finding that a single high dose NVP-HDM201 treatment, administered
orally or intravenously, resulted in a robust and sustained tumor
regression. Overall, both daily and once every 3 weeks dosing regimen
showed comparable long term efficacy in preclinical studies. The ongoing
clinical trial is currently designed to compare both dosing regimens with
regard to efficacy and tolerability.

