Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an individualized 3D transport model of topotecan
for a patient-derived orthotopic xenograft model of pediatric
neuroblastoma


Resistance to chemotherapeutics and targeted therapies in pediatric solid
tumors including neuroblastoma is a common cause of poor clinical
outcome. These failures in part stem from shortcomings in understanding
inter- and intra-tumor heterogeneities of drug penetration due to
heterogeneities in blood perfusion. Herein we propose to develop an
individualized 3D transport model of topotecan (TPT) for a
patient-derived orthotopic xenograft model of pediatric NB5 neuroblastoma
to account for inter- and intra-tumor heterogeneities in blood perfusion.
The transport model uses a 3D reaction-diffusion equation to simulate
diffusion of TPT from blood vessels into the tumor tissue and its flux in
and out of intracellular space. Our transport model takes three types of
inputs to predict TPT exposure maps defined over the volume of an
individual tumor: a) plasma concentration-time profiles from an
individualized physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model of TPT
(separate cohort), b) 3D blood perfusion map of the individual tumor from
contrast enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) using VisualSonics VEVO 2100 imaging
system, and c) in vitro TPT cellular uptake and efflux kinetics from
two-photon imaging. We use in vitro pharmacodynamics (PD) experiments
with NB5 cells exposed to TPT to derive probabilistic PD-rules for drug
effects (e.g., -H2AX response). Based on these rules and the exposure
maps, we then compute probabilities of effects for the entire tumor
volume. We will validate the predicted drug effect maps by comparing them
to the observed effects measured by immunohistochemistry marker for -H2AX
from the same tumor (location matched) using spatial correlation
techniques.

