Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic KRAS mutations induce PD-L1 overexpression through MAPK
pathway activation in non-small cell lung cancer cells


The proto-oncogene KRAS is a frequently mutated oncogenic drivers in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and druggable molecular targets for
KRAS-mutated NSCLC have been under investigation. Recent studies have
reported promising results of nivolumab, a programmed death 1 (PD-1)
immune-checkpoint-inhibitor antibody, for previously treated NSCLC
patients and suggested that the programmed-death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is a
candidate surrogate marker for the anti-PD-1 therapy. By microarray
analysis, we found that short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated stable
knockdown of mutant KRAS downregulated the expression of the CD274 gene
(encoding PD-L1) in the NSCLC cell lines, H358 (-2.68 fold-change) and
H441 (-1.98 fold-change). Additionally, we confirmed that small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting mutant KRAS, but not wild-type KRAS,
reduced CD274 mRNA expression in these cell lines. As expected, the CD274
expression levels were higher in these cell lines when examining the
expression in a panel of NSCLC cell lines by quantitative RT-PCR
analysis. Furthermore, CD274 mRNA expression was downregulated by MEK and
ERK inhibitors (U0126, FR180204, selumetinib) in H358 and H441 cells. On
the other hand, the expression analysis also revealed that CD274 mRNA
levels vary among KRAS-mutated cell lines. These results suggest that
oncogenic KRAS mutations induce PD-L1 overexpression through activation
of the MAPK pathway in NSCLC cells, whereas other unknown mechanisms that
modulate PD-L1 expression underlie in different KRAS-mutated NSCLCs.

