Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hand-1 overexpression inhibits medulloblastoma cell invasion and
metastatic ability via Oct-3/4 / -catenin interaction


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant brain tumor in
children. Treatment of medulloblastoma includes surgery, radiation and
chemotherapy. Despite long-term survival for the majority of children,
50% of medulloblastomas recur. Recently, medulloblastomas are classified
into four distinct molecular subgroups, viz., WNT, SHH, group 3, and
group 4 based on constitutive activation of WNT/-catenin, SHH, and NOTCH
signaling pathways that regulate cancer stem cell pluripotency, tumor
growth, progression and metastasis. Previously, we investigated the
molecular machinery underlying uPAR and WNT/-catenin interdependent
signaling pathways in medulloblastoma stem cells. Further, we showed that
ionizing radiation-induced uPAR overexpression is associated with
increased accumulation of -catenin in the nucleus. Complementing to this
we demonstrated that uPAR protein act as cytoplasmic sequestration factor
for a novel basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, Hand-1. Here, we
show that Hand-1 expression is observed to be downregulated in all the
molecular subgroups of medulloblastoma. We also showed that the
pluripotency marker, Oct-3/4 (encoded by the Pou5f1 gene) interacts with
-catenin and Hand-1 that ultimately regulated the uPAR expression. Our
preliminary study demonstrated that Oct-3/4 preferentially cooperated
with -catenin in medulloblastoma to maintain tumor progression.
Immunohistostaining of clinical specimens also confirmed our
aforementioned results. Taken together, our studies show that
overexpression of Hand-1 in medulloblastoma cells may effectively inhibit
uPAR-induced invasion and metastatic ability, thereby regulating
Oct-3/4/-catenin balance.

