Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship of G-CSF related bone pain (BP) with Bv8/PK2
expression in breast cancer (BC) patients (pts) treated with FEC100
adjuvant chemotherapy (CT)


The Bv8/Prokineticins (PKs) are a new family of peptides identified in
frog, fish, reptiles and mammals that signal through two highly
homologous G-protein coupled receptors, PKR1 and PKR2. Over the past few
years, several biological functions of Bv8/PK proteins have been
elucidated. The high expression level of human Bv8/PK2 in bone marrow,
lymphoid organs and leukocytes suggested an involvement of these peptides
in hematopoiesis and in inflammatory and immunomodulatory processes.
Neutrophils are the main endogenous source of Bv8/PK2, while G-CSF is the
the only cytokine able to activate PK2 expression in neutrophiles.
Moreover G-CSF derived pain seems to be stronlgly related to blood levels
of Bv8/PK. According to these results, we started a clinical experimental
trial in order to explore role and expression of Bv8/PK proteins in
patients treated with chemotherapy for early breast cancer and receiving
G-CSF (filgrastim vs peg-filgrastim), investigating also the relationship
with G-CSF related pain.Methods: 20 BC pts were submitted to adjuvant
FEC100. G-CSF was given as primary prophylaxis. 12 pts received
Lenograstim (L: 5 doses, beginning 96 hours after CT) while 8 pts
received Pegfilgrastim (P: 1 dose 24 hours after CT). Real-Time PCR and
Elisa test were used to analyze Bv8/PK2 expression both in pts receiving
L and P. Blood samples for Bv8/PK2 analysis were taken in different steps
and days, in order to evaluate Bv8/PK2 expression according to CT time
and G-CSF administration. Incidence of neutropenia (N), febrile-N and BP
(NRS) were evaluated in all CT cycles. 6 healthy women were recruited as
controls to evaluate their Bv8/PK2 basal level. Results: An impressive
increase of Bv8/PK2 expression was observed both in L and P group. N
occurred in 41.6% of pts treated with L (G3: 8.3%; G4: 16.7%) and in 75%
of pts with P (G3: 12.5%; G4: 62.5%; 1 FN). In pts receiving L an
incidence of BP occurred in 59.3% (NRS 7-8: 41%) with a mean duration of
6 days; in P group incidence was 37.5% (NRS 7-8: 37.5%), BP lasting 4
days. In all pts BP started within 24-48 hours after G-CSF
administration, concurrently with Bv8/PK2 overexpression. Conclusions:
Our preliminary results suggest an emerging role of Bv8/prokineticin
system in occurrence of G-CSF related BP in primary prevention of CT
induced N. Therefore, inhibition of Bv8/PK2 activity should constitute a
promising therapeutic strategy to prevent inflammatory pain and perhaps
other cancer characteristics.

