Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sunitinib enhances the antitumor responses of agonistic
CD40-antibody by reducing MDSCs and synergistically improving endothelial
activation and T-cell recruitment


CD40-activating immunotherapy has potent anti-tumor effects due to its
ability to activate dendritic cells and induce cytotoxic T-cell
responses. However, its efficacy is limited by accumulation of
immunosuppressive cells in the tumor and by endothelial anergy induced by
pro-angiogenic growth factors. Here, we show that combining agonistic
CD40 monoclonal antibody (mAb) therapy with vascular targeting using the
tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib significantly decrease tumor growth
and improve survival in B16.F10 melanoma and T241 fibrosarcoma. Treatment
of tumor-bearing mice with anti-CD40 mAb lead to increased activation of
CD11c+ dendritic cells in the tumor draining lymph node, as evidenced by
enhanced CD86 expression, while sunitinib treatment reduced vessel
density. CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid derived suppressor cells accumulated in the
tumor draining lymph nodes after anti-CD40 mAb treatment. This effect was
reversed by co-treatment with sunitinib. Tumor endothelial expression of
ICAM1 and VCAM1 adhesion molecules were increased only when anti-CD40 mAb
treatment was combined with sunitinib. This was associated with enhanced
tumoral infiltration of CD8+ T-lymphocytes. Our results show that
combining CD40-stimulating immunotherapy with sunitinib treatment exert
potent complementary antitumor effects mediated by dendritic cell
activation, reduction in myeloid derived suppressor cells and increased
endothelial activation, resulting in enhanced recruitment of cytotoxic T
cells.

