Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteome-wide triple negative breast cancer mutant p53 association
index identifies chromatin unwinding for precision therapeutics


Over 80% of TNBCs express mutant p53 (mtp53) proteins. We coupled cell
fractionation with stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell
culture (SILAC) and inducible knockdown of endogenous mtp53 to determine
the mtp53 driven proteome in the cytoplasm and chromatin of triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells. Using SILAC coupled to tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) we identified that R273H mtp53 expression in
MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells both up and down-regulated multiple
proteins and metabolic pathways. We sequenced 73,154 peptide pairs that
corresponded to 3010 proteins detected under reciprocal labeling
conditions in the cytoplasm and 48,825 peptide pairs that corresponded to
5195 proteins in the chromatin fraction. Pathway enrichment analysis
ranked the DNA unwinding pathway as the highest chromatin associated
pathway regulated by mtp53. Moreover, to summarize and quantify the
degree of under- or over-expression of a protein from two reciprocal
experiments, a mutant p53 association index (mPAI) was defined as the log
(of base 2) ratio of two readings from the two reciprocal experiments.
Values of mPAI were normally distributed with a mean close to zero,
consistent with the fact that levels of the majority of proteins were not
affected by mtp53 knockdown. Standard deviation of mPAI is close to one
and mtp53 itself shows mPAI values of greater than 2.0 (z-score > 2.0) in
both cytosol and chromatin fractions, consistent with the expectation
that its levels are significantly reduced by knockdown experiments. We
thereby identified proteins and pathways significantly affected by mtp53
knockdowns as those with mPAI > 1.0 (indicating positive association) or
mPAI Over 80% of TNBCs express mutant p53 (mtp53) proteins. We coupled
cell fractionation with stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell
culture (SILAC) and inducible knockdown of endogenous mtp53 to determine
the mtp53 driven proteome in the cytoplasm and chromatin of triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells. Using SILAC coupled to tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) we identified that R273H mtp53 expression in
MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells both up and down-regulated multiple
proteins and metabolic pathways. We sequenced 73,154 peptide pairs that
corresponded to 3010 proteins detected under reciprocal labeling
conditions in the cytoplasm and 48,825 peptide pairs that corresponded to
5195 proteins in the chromatin fraction. Pathway enrichment analysis
ranked the DNA unwinding pathway as the highest chromatin associated
pathway regulated by mtp53. Moreover, to summarize and quantify the
degree of under- or over-expression of a protein from two reciprocal
experiments, a mutant p53 association index (mPAI) was defined as the log
(of base 2) ratio of two readings from the two reciprocal experiments.
Values of mPAI were normally distributed with a mean close to zero,
consistent with the fact that levels of the majority of proteins were not
affected by mtp53 knockdown. Standard deviation of mPAI is close to one
and mtp53 itself shows mPAI values of greater than 2.0 (z-score > 2.0) in
both cytosol and chromatin fractions, consistent with the expectation
that its levels are significantly reduced by knockdown experiments. We
thereby identified proteins and pathways significantly affected by mtp53
knockdowns as those with mPAI > 1.0 (indicating positive association) or
mPAI < -1.0 (indicating negative association). A pathway that was
positively associated in both the cytoplasm and the chromatin was the DNA
unwinding pathway, which was represented by associated changes for all
the minichromosome maintenance protein complex proteins 2 through 7
(MCM2-7). This hexomeric protein ring structure complex is the eukaryotic
DNA helicase complex required for DNA replication and elongation of the
replication fork. We validated that the MCM4 protein level is positively
associated with mtp53 R273H in the TNBC cell line MDA-MB-468 and in the
colon adenocarcinoma cell line HT-29. This suggests that targeting
inhibition of the MCM hexomeric complex may be a good precision medicine
approach for TNBCs. Further studies are in progress to determine the
efficacy of targeting inhibition of MCMs 2-7 as a mechanism to block TNBC.

