Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy of folate-targeted chemotherapeutics with
anti-PD-1 antibody against folate receptor-positive tumors in
immunocompetent murine models


The PD-1/PD-L1 (programmed cell death protein 1; programmed death-ligand
1) pathway plays a key role in immunological tolerance and autoimmunity.
PD-1 is primarily expressed on activated T and B cells while its
receptor, PD-L1, is expressed in a variety of cell types including
resting lymphocytes, DCs, and macrophages. Recently, multiple human solid
tumor types (melanoma, NSCLC, RCC, ovarian, and colorectal cancer) have
been found to overexpress PD-L1 within its tumor microenvironment. More
importantly, PD-1/PD-L1 blocking agents (pembrolizumab, nivolumab,
lambrolizumab, MPDL3280A) have been found active as a single agent or in
combination with chemotherapy and some have produced durable clinical
responses. On the other hand, human epithelial tumors are also known to
overexpress the high-affinity folate receptor (FR)-alpha that is capable
of bringing folate-linked drugs into the cell cytosol via endocytosis.
Using flow cytometry, we assessed PD-L1 expression in various FR-positive
syngeneic mouse tumor models (M109, Renca, L1210A, 4T1-Cl2, ID8-Cl15).
PD-L1 expression was found to vary significantly among different tumor
types and could be found not only on CD45- malignant cells but also on
tumor stromal cells such as F4/80+CD11b+ tumor-associated macrophages.
Using a rat anti-mouse PD-1 antibody (clone RMP1-14), we studied in-vivo
efficacy of a folate-targeted chemotherapy in combination with PD-1/PD-L1
blockage in PD-L1-expressing tumor models. In syngeneic models with high
PD-L1 expression and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, a synergistic and
curable anti-tumor effect was observed and the animals developed
tumor-protective immunity against rechallenge. Thus, our preliminary
results suggest that folate-targeted chemotherapeutics may also be
enhanced by PD-1/PD-L1 blockage by means of overcoming tumor-mediated
immune suppression

