Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high ratio of tamoxifen metabolite E to tamoxifen is associated
with an increased risk of breast cancer recurrences in premenopausal women


Tamoxifen (Tam), a standard therapy for estrogen receptor (ER)-positive
breast cancer, is excessively metabolized mainly by enzymes of the CYP450
family to anti-estrogenic and estrogenic compounds. Whereas in breast
cancer cells the anti-estrogenic metabolites endoxifen and 4-hydroxy-Tam
inhibit the ER, Tam bisphenol (Bis) and both isomers (E)- and (Z)- of
metabolite E (Met E) show full estrogenic properties, with (E)-Met E
being the most potent ER agonist. Contrary to known clinical effects of
ER antagonists, the influence of Tam Bis, (E)-, and (Z)-Met E on
treatment outcome is not thoroughly explored. Therefore we analyzed
whether interindividual differences in plasma levels of estrogenic Tam
metabolites interact with Tam therapy in vivo.Plasma concentrations of
estrogenic metabolites Bis, (E)-, and (Z)-Met E and their metabolic
ratios (MR) to Tam were quantified in 306 premenopausal breast cancer
patients mainly of European origin who were treated with 20 mg/day of Tam
(Eccles D, et al. BMC Cancer 2007; 7: 160) using recently published
LC-MS/MS methods (Johnning et al. Anal Bioanal Chem 2015; Mrdter et al.
Clin Pharmacol Ther 2011). The endpoints recurrence-free interval (RFI)
and event-free survival (EFS) were analyzed in hormone-receptor positive
patients (N = 296) by Kaplan-Meyer and multivariate Cox regression
adjusted for age, nodal status, tumor size, grade and plasma
concentrations of endoxifen (as MR of desmethyl-Tam to endoxifen).Plasma
concentrations were as follows: Bis 13-832 pM (median 187 pM), (E)-Met E
15-1029 pM (median 213 pM), (Z)-Met E 128-2484 pM (median 889 pM), and
Tam 47-1061 nM (median 360 nM). Patients with higher (E)-Met E to Tam
ratios showed a higher risk of breast cancer recurrence when classified
into quartiles: compared to patients of the lower quartile, patients had
shorter RFI when they grouped to the interquartile (P = 0.037) and the
upper quartile (P = 0.005). There was a trend of higher recurrence risk
for patients belonging to the upper quartile compared to the
interquartile (P = 0.063). These findings were confirmed in multivariate
Cox analyses: patients belonging to the upper quartile had a
significantly increased hazard ratio (HR) of 2.77 (95% confidence
interval (CI) 1.34-5.71; P = 0.006) and patients belonging to the
interquartile showed a trend for increased HR of 1.75 (CI = 0.88-3.46; P
= 0.1). For EFS, a linearly increased HR was confirmed for patients with
higher (E)-Met E to Tam ratios (HR = 1.44, CI = 1.06-1.97; P = 0.021).
Bis, (Z)-Met E and their MRs to Tam showed no significantly altered risk
of cancer recurrence or death.These findings suggest that higher
formation rates of the most potent estrogenic Tam metabolite (E)-Met E
influence Tam outcome in breast cancer patients and may be linked to
therapeutic failure.

