Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplicative interaction between HIV infection status and FIB-4
in prediction of hepatocellular carcinoma risk


Purpose: FIB-4 is an established marker of liver fibrosis and cirrhosis,
calculated from platelet count, alanine transaminase, aspartate
transaminase, and age. We previously found baseline FIB-4 to be strongly
associated with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) risk among HIV-infected
(HIV+) patients in the US; a similar finding was reported among persons
who consume alcohol or are chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) carriers in
South Korea. Longitudinal associations between FIB-4 and HCC risk have
not yet been explored. We aimed to expand our prior investigation by
including uninfected patients, using time-updated FIB-4, and testing for
multiplicative interaction between HIV status and FIB-4 in the prediction
of HCC risk. We hypothesized that the relationship between FIB-4 and HCC
risk would differ by HIV status.Methods: We tested this hypothesis in the
Veterans Aging Cohort Study, an open cohort that enrolls HIV+ veterans
when they begin HIV care in the Veterans Health Administration and
matches two uninfected patients by age, sex, race/ethnicity, and clinical
site. We used proportional hazards regression models with time-varying
covariates to calculate hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals
(CI) for FIB-4, adjusted for HCC risk factors (age, sex, race, hepatitis
C virus (HCV) infection, HBV infection, smoking, alcohol, BMI, and
diabetes). We used the counting process to create time-updated FIB-4
intervals and examined one-, three-, and five-year lagged FIB-4. We
identified incident HCC cases from the VA Central Cancer Registry and
determined hepatitis C virus and hepatitis B virus status from laboratory
results. We defined low (3.25) as previously established.Results: Between
2000 and 2012, among 37,158 HIV+ subjects, 202 developed HCC. Among
78,339 uninfected subjects, 207 developed HCC. There was a significant
multiplicative interaction between HIV status and one-year lagged FIB-4
(interaction p = 0.0015). High FIB-4 was a stronger predictor of HCC in
the uninfected than in HIV+. Among uninfected, the adjusted HR was 6.9
(95% CI: 3.4, 12.5) for intermediate FIB-4 and 40.0 (95% CI: 22.3, 71.8)
for high FIB-4 compared to uninfected with low FIB-4. Among HIV+, with
the same reference group (uninfected with low FIB-4), the adjusted HR was
2.1 (95% CI: 1.0, 4.4) for low FIB-4, 6.4 (95% CI: 3.5, 11.7) for
intermediate FIB-4, and 23.7 (95% CI: 13.1, 42.9) for high FIB-4. There
was no interaction between FIB-4 and HCV status (p = 0.92). Results were
qualitatively similar using a three- or five-year lag.Conclusions:
Calculated from routine, non-invasive laboratory tests, FIB-4 is a
strong, independent HCC risk factor in both HIV+ and uninfected subjects
after adjustment for other HCC risk factors. FiB-4 appears to be a
stronger risk factor in uninfected than in HIV+.

