Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of VEGF and VEGFR polymorphisms on neuroendocrine tumors of
the gastro-entero-pancreatic system (GEPNETs) outcome


Introduction: Gastro-entero-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs)
are uncommon neoplasms including a wide range of anatomical, clinical,
histological and molecular malignant entities. Improving our
understanding of the molecular biology of GEP-NETs represents a key
challenge in the treatment of these rare tumors. Therefore we aimed to
analyze genotypes of VEGF-A, VEGFR2 and Flt4 in GEP-NETs and their
potential correlation with the risk of these tumors and/or with the
outcome.Methods: The genomic DNA of 28 consecutive patients with GEP-NETs
treated at our Institution was extracted from paraffinembedded tissue. We
selected polymorphisms in the following genes: VEGF-A (rs2010963G>C,
rs699947A>C), VEGFR-2 (rs2305948C>T, rs1870377T>A) and VEGFR-3
(rs307826T>C, rs307821C>A). Gene polymorphisms were determined by
Real-Time PCR using TaqMan assays.Results: Median age was 58 (range
33-78) and M/F ratio was 1/1. Twenty-one out of the 28 patients had NETs
of the pancreas. The allele frequency of VEGFR2 rs2305948C and of VEGFA
rs2010963G showed a trend of lower frequency than in general population
(82% vs. 92% and 60.3% vs. 68.8%, respectively, pIntroduction:
Gastro-entero-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs) are uncommon
neoplasms including a wide range of anatomical, clinical, histological
and molecular malignant entities. Improving our understanding of the
molecular biology of GEP-NETs represents a key challenge in the treatment
of these rare tumors. Therefore we aimed to analyze genotypes of VEGF-A,
VEGFR2 and Flt4 in GEP-NETs and their potential correlation with the risk
of these tumors and/or with the outcome.Methods: The genomic DNA of 28
consecutive patients with GEP-NETs treated at our Institution was
extracted from paraffinembedded tissue. We selected polymorphisms in the
following genes: VEGF-A (rs2010963G>C, rs699947A>C), VEGFR-2
(rs2305948C>T, rs1870377T>A) and VEGFR-3 (rs307826T>C, rs307821C>A). Gene
polymorphisms were determined by Real-Time PCR using TaqMan
assays.Results: Median age was 58 (range 33-78) and M/F ratio was 1/1.
Twenty-one out of the 28 patients had NETs of the pancreas. The allele
frequency of VEGFR2 rs2305948C and of VEGFA rs2010963G showed a trend of
lower frequency than in general population (82% vs. 92% and 60.3% vs.
68.8%, respectively, p<0.001). The following factors significantly
correlated with a poorer overall survival (pIntroduction:
Gastro-entero-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs) are uncommon
neoplasms including a wide range of anatomical, clinical, histological
and molecular malignant entities. Improving our understanding of the
molecular biology of GEP-NETs represents a key challenge in the treatment
of these rare tumors. Therefore we aimed to analyze genotypes of VEGF-A,
VEGFR2 and Flt4 in GEP-NETs and their potential correlation with the risk
of these tumors and/or with the outcome.Methods: The genomic DNA of 28
consecutive patients with GEP-NETs treated at our Institution was
extracted from paraffinembedded tissue. We selected polymorphisms in the
following genes: VEGF-A (rs2010963G>C, rs699947A>C), VEGFR-2
(rs2305948C>T, rs1870377T>A) and VEGFR-3 (rs307826T>C, rs307821C>A). Gene
polymorphisms were determined by Real-Time PCR using TaqMan
assays.Results: Median age was 58 (range 33-78) and M/F ratio was 1/1.
Twenty-one out of the 28 patients had NETs of the pancreas. The allele
frequency of VEGFR2 rs2305948C and of VEGFA rs2010963G showed a trend of
lower frequency than in general population (82% vs. 92% and 60.3% vs.
68.8%, respectively, p<0.001). The following factors significantly
correlated with a poorer overall survival (p<0.05): VEGFA rs699947C,
VEGFA rs2010963A, VEGFR-2 rs1870377T/A, VEGFR-2 rs2305948C/T, VEGFR-3
rs307821C and VEGFR-3 rs307826T.Conclusion: Our results suggest, for the
first time, that inherited abnormalities in VEGF pathway influence the
risk and aggressiveness of GEP-NETs. Within March 2016 final data about
all the enrolled 64 patients will be also available. These results should
be validated prospectively in order to optimize the diagnosis and
treatment of these patients.

