Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of an NKX3.1-G9a-UTY regulatory network that
controls proper prostate differentiation


Maintenance of cell differentiation is tightly coordinated by specific
gene expression programs, which are often deregulated during
tumorigenesis. While the homeodomain-containing transcription factor,
NKX3.1, plays essential roles in both prostate differentiation and
prostate cancer, the mechanisms governing these events are still unclear.
Here, we aim to elucidate detailed mechanisms governing Nkx3.1-driven
prostate epithelial differentiation and explain how deregulation of such
can lead to prostate tumorigenesis.Using an Nkx3.1 mutant mouse model, we
find that loss-of-function of Nkx3.1 in the prostate results in the
down-regulation of genes associated with prostate differentiation as well
as the up-regulation of genes that are not normally expressed in
prostate. Interestingly, these mice also develop pre-malignant lesions
resembling prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN). Conversely, gain of
function of Nkx3.1 in a fully differentiated non-prostate epithelium is
sufficient to induce prostate differentiation in renal grafts in vivo.
Using a DNA binding mutant, we show that these activities are mediated
via NKX3.1 homeodomain in vitro and in vivo. Exploiting mass spectrometry
to identify NKX3.1-interacting proteins, we find that NKX3.1 interacts
with the histone methyltransferase G9a and that this interaction is
required for induction of prostate differentiation in vitro and in vivo.
Finally, we show that these NKX3.1-driven activities are mediated, at
least in part, by regulation of target genes such as the male-specific
factor UTY (KDM6c).We propose that the NKX3.1-G9a-UTY network is
essential for proper prostate differentiation whereas disruption of these
activities predisposes to cancer.

