Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting metastasis and cancer stem-like cells in triple negative
breast cancer through inhibition of focal adhesion kinase


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype of breast
cancer closely associated with an early pattern of metastasis and lack of
targeted therapies. As such the prognosis for TNBC is poor. Whilst
targeting signalling pathways known to promote metastasis-supporting
behaviours may well provide an important therapeutic opportunity for such
cancers, recent evidence points to an association between cancer
stem-like cell (CSC) populations and the aggressive behaviours of TNBC,
including their chemoresistance.Aberrant activity and/or expression of
the non-receptor tyrosine kinase FAK (focal adhesion kinase) is known to
contribute to the development and progression of cancer due to its
central role as a mediator of cell attachment, migration and survival.
More recently, FAK has been suggested to influence anoikis resistance,
thus implying its activity may contribute to the phenotype of CSCs. Here
we have explored the role of FAK in TNBC cells as a putative therapeutic
target to suppress the metastatic phenotype.FAK activity was inhibited in
MDA-MB-231 (TNBC) and MCF7 (luminal breast cancer) cells
pharmacologically using PF-562,271 (PF271), a competitive-inhibitor of
the ATP-kinase domain or through siRNA-mediated knockdown to probe
scaffolding function of FAK. Functional assessment of TNBC proliferation,
migration and invasion was performed using cell counting and Boyden
chamber assays respectively, whilst stem-like behaviours
(anchorage-independent growth, self-renewal) were investigated using
stem-cell enrichment (mammosphere-based assays). The surface marker
profile of CSCs was investigated using FACS, while changes in
intracellular signalling pathways in response to FAK inhibition was
revealed through Western blotting and immunofluorescent
microscopy.MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cells displayed comparable levels of total
and activated (Y397/Y861) FAK which were depleted in response to PF271 in
a dose dependent manner: however, TNBC cells were significantly more
sensitive. Cellular migration in TNBC cell models occurred in a
FAK-dependent manner with both PF271 and FAK siRNA suppressing endogenous
and fibroblast-stimulated migration/invasion (pTriple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype of breast cancer closely
associated with an early pattern of metastasis and lack of targeted
therapies. As such the prognosis for TNBC is poor. Whilst targeting
signalling pathways known to promote metastasis-supporting behaviours may
well provide an important therapeutic opportunity for such cancers,
recent evidence points to an association between cancer stem-like cell
(CSC) populations and the aggressive behaviours of TNBC, including their
chemoresistance.Aberrant activity and/or expression of the non-receptor
tyrosine kinase FAK (focal adhesion kinase) is known to contribute to the
development and progression of cancer due to its central role as a
mediator of cell attachment, migration and survival. More recently, FAK
has been suggested to influence anoikis resistance, thus implying its
activity may contribute to the phenotype of CSCs. Here we have explored
the role of FAK in TNBC cells as a putative therapeutic target to
suppress the metastatic phenotype.FAK activity was inhibited in
MDA-MB-231 (TNBC) and MCF7 (luminal breast cancer) cells
pharmacologically using PF-562,271 (PF271), a competitive-inhibitor of
the ATP-kinase domain or through siRNA-mediated knockdown to probe
scaffolding function of FAK. Functional assessment of TNBC proliferation,
migration and invasion was performed using cell counting and Boyden
chamber assays respectively, whilst stem-like behaviours
(anchorage-independent growth, self-renewal) were investigated using
stem-cell enrichment (mammosphere-based assays). The surface marker
profile of CSCs was investigated using FACS, while changes in
intracellular signalling pathways in response to FAK inhibition was
revealed through Western blotting and immunofluorescent
microscopy.MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cells displayed comparable levels of total
and activated (Y397/Y861) FAK which were depleted in response to PF271 in
a dose dependent manner: however, TNBC cells were significantly more
sensitive. Cellular migration in TNBC cell models occurred in a
FAK-dependent manner with both PF271 and FAK siRNA suppressing endogenous
and fibroblast-stimulated migration/invasion (p<0.001 versus vehicle
control). Inhibition of FAK also caused a significant decrease in the
growth rate of TNBC cells. FACS analysis of MDA-MB-231 cell cultures
revealed a significant subpopulation of cells exhibiting the CSC surface
marker profile CD24-/CD44+. Moreover, TNBC cells were able to form
self-renewing mammospheres in non-adherent culture. PF271 treatment or
siRNA-mediated knockdown of FAK significantly attenuated
mammosphere-forming ability and self-renewal of these cultures.These data
point to a role for FAK as a mediator of metastatic behaviour in TNBC
cells, whilst also showing the capacity to influence self-renewal of a
CSC population. FAK may therefore represent an emerging therapeutic
target in such cases.

