Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hedgehog pathway inhibition sensitizes embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma
to standard chemotherapy


Hedgehog (Hh) is one of the key pathways orchestrating embryonic
development as well as regulating homeostasis of postnatal organs.
Perturbation of Hh signaling activity is associated with the onset of
different childhood cancer entities such as embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma
(eRMS). According to this, previous findings from our laboratory revealed
that the tumor initiating populations (TIPs) of eRMS retain high activity
of the pathway, which boosts their tumorigenic potential and self-renewal
ability. Moreover, TIPs are well known to be responsible for seeding
recurrent tumors following standard chemotherapy. This phenomenon might
explain the failure of cytotoxic drugs in high-risk eRMS patients for
whom conventional therapeutic approaches remain inadequate.Therefore, in
this study we investigated the role of Hh pathway in the context of
chemoresistance. We established several patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
models and primary cells derived from diagnostic and relapsed tumor
specimens. Histological and immunofluorescence analysis confirmed that
both cellular and patient heterogeneity were preserved in our cohort.
Interestingly, we found that Hh target genes were significantly
upregulated in chemoresistant PDX tumors and demonstrated that the use of
Hh antagonists could significantly sensitize eRMS cells toward debulking
drugs such as doxorubicin, actinomycin and vincristine. Ongoing
experiments aim at confirming these results in cells with selective
knock- out of components of Hh pathway as well as at elucidating if
chemotherapy might induce a selection of resistant clones or a transition
of sensitive cancer cells toward a resistant phenotype with high Hh
pathway activity.In conclusion, our data indicate that inhibition of Hh
signaling might represent a promising strategy to enhance the therapeutic
window of standard cytotoxic agents.

