Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transgenic antigen-specific, HLA-A*02:01-allo-restricted cytotoxic
T cells recognize tumor-associated target antigen STEAP1 with high
specificity


Background: Pediatric cancers, including Ewing sarcoma (ES), are only
weakly immunogenic and the tumor-patients immune system often is devoid
of effector T cells for tumor elimination. Based on expression profiling
technology targetable tumor associated antigens (TAA) are identified and
exploited for engineered T cell therapy. Here, the specific recognition
and lytic potential of transgenic, allo-restricted CD8+ T cells directed
against the ES-associated antigen STEAP1 was examined.Methods: Following
repetitive STEAP1130 peptide-driven stimulations with HLA-A*02:01+
dendritic cells, allo-restricted HLA-A*02:01- CD8+ T cells were sorted
with HLA-A*02:01/peptide multimers and expanded by limiting dilution.
After functional analysis of suitable T cell clones via ELISpot, flow
cytometry and xCELLigence assay, TCR - and -chains were identified. They
were cloned into retroviral vectors, codon optimized, transfected into
HLA-A*02:01- primary T cell populations and tested again for specificity
and lytic capacity in vitro and in a Rag2-/-c-/- mouse model.Results:
Initially generated and transgenic T cells specifically recognized
STEAP1130-pulsed or transfected cells in the context of HLA-A*02:01 with
minimal cross-reactivity as determined by specific IFN release. They
lysed cells and inhibited growth of HLA-A*02:01+ ES lines more
effectively than HLA-A*02:01- ES lines. In vivo tumor growth was
inhibited more effective with transgenic STEAP1130-specific T cells than
with unspecific T cells.Conclusion: Our results identify TCRs capable of
recognizing and inhibiting growth of STEAP1 expressing HLA-A*02:01+ ES
cells in vitro and in vivo in a highly restricted manner. As STEAP1 is
overexpressed in a wide variety of cancers, we anticipate these
STEAP1-specific TCRs to be potentially useful for immunotherapy of other
STEAP1 expressing tumors.

