Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ImmTACs re-direct the immune system efficiently to eradicate cancer


Immunotherapy strategies that are able to induce T cell infiltration into
tumors and activate a cytotoxic T cell response have the potential to
destroy the tumor. Although T cells can mediate clearance of a tumor,
thymic selection and the suppressive microenvironment limit their
effectiveness. To overcome poor tumor immunogenicity, we have developed a
unique platform that enables the generation of ImmTACs (Immune-mobilising
monoclonal TCRs Against Cancer); these are comprised of an affinity
enhanced TCR specific for a cancer antigen fused to an anti-CD3 scFv. The
TCR end targets and binds MHC class I/peptide complex displayed on
cancerous cells while the anti-CD3 scFv end engages polyclonal T cells to
mediate a potent anti-tumor response.The most advanced ImmTAC, IMCgp100,
targets the HLA-A2/gp100280-288 epitope presented by melanoma cells.
IMCgp100 is currently in a Phase I/IIa clinical trial for advance
malignant melanoma and is showing promising clinical efficacy in some
patients. Here we report a series of in vitro experiments evaluating
IMCgp100 mechanism of action. IMCgp100 is able to redirect T cells from
healthy donors or from melanoma patients to destroy cancer cells and
secrete a range of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines associated with
T cell trafficking into tumors; some of these cytokines also induce
upregulation of inhibitory pathway molecules. We show that effector
memory cells in the CD8+ and CD4+ T cell compartments are very efficient
in eliminating melanoma cells and in expanding upon IMCgp100 engagement.
The effects of combining IMCgp100 with agents that relieve the
suppression imposed by immune check-point molecules have also been
investigated.

