Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell-based, high-throughput screen for small molecule inducers of
cell death in HPV-associated head and neck cancers


High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) is an oncogenic virus associated
with 90% of cervical cancers, over 60% of oropharyngeal carcinoma cases
and over 90% of anogenital cancers. Although HPV-positive cancers are
molecularly, clinically and epidemiologically distinct from HPV-negative
cancers, there are no specific or targeted therapies for HPV-positive
cancers. In order to identify small molecule inhibitors that target
HPV-positive cancers, we performed a high throughput drug screen on 24
cervical cancer and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell
lines (12 HPV-positive and 12 HPV-negative) to determine if these cell
lines display differential sensitivity based on HPV status. HPV-positive
cell lines with doubling times of less than 72 hours were selected for
the screen. Unsupervised clustering of HNSCC cell lines based on protein
expression levels obtained from reverse phase protein array (RPPA) was
used to select matched HPV-negative cell lines by Spearman's rank-order
correlation. Cytotoxic chemotherapeutics and agents targeting a broad
range of processes including cell cycle control and DNA damage response
were obtained from commercial vendors and academic collaborators. Drug
sensitivity was measured by using nuclear staining to monitor cell death
and proliferation after 72h of treatment. The screen of 1062 unique
compounds at 6 different concentrations (0-3M) in 24 cell lines
represents 25,448 cell line drug interactions. To ensure the robustness
and reproducibility of the screen, the Z-factor and standard deviation
for biological replicates were calculated. A Z-factor greater 0.5 was
considered acceptable and the mean standard deviation across all drugs
for each cell line was 0.06. Drug sensitivity was determined by
calculating IC50 and area under the curve (AUC) values. Overall,
HPV-positive HNSCC cell lines showed greater sensitivity to 13 drugs from
different classes. Particularly, HPV-positive HNSCC cells were more
sensitive to p38 MAPK and B-Raf inhibitors including LY2228820 (p
High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) is an oncogenic virus associated
with 90% of cervical cancers, over 60% of oropharyngeal carcinoma cases
and over 90% of anogenital cancers. Although HPV-positive cancers are
molecularly, clinically and epidemiologically distinct from HPV-negative
cancers, there are no specific or targeted therapies for HPV-positive
cancers. In order to identify small molecule inhibitors that target
HPV-positive cancers, we performed a high throughput drug screen on 24
cervical cancer and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell
lines (12 HPV-positive and 12 HPV-negative) to determine if these cell
lines display differential sensitivity based on HPV status. HPV-positive
cell lines with doubling times of less than 72 hours were selected for
the screen. Unsupervised clustering of HNSCC cell lines based on protein
expression levels obtained from reverse phase protein array (RPPA) was
used to select matched HPV-negative cell lines by Spearman's rank-order
correlation. Cytotoxic chemotherapeutics and agents targeting a broad
range of processes including cell cycle control and DNA damage response
were obtained from commercial vendors and academic collaborators. Drug
sensitivity was measured by using nuclear staining to monitor cell death
and proliferation after 72h of treatment. The screen of 1062 unique
compounds at 6 different concentrations (0-3M) in 24 cell lines
represents 25,448 cell line drug interactions. To ensure the robustness
and reproducibility of the screen, the Z-factor and standard deviation
for biological replicates were calculated. A Z-factor greater 0.5 was
considered acceptable and the mean standard deviation across all drugs
for each cell line was 0.06. Drug sensitivity was determined by
calculating IC50 and area under the curve (AUC) values. Overall,
HPV-positive HNSCC cell lines showed greater sensitivity to 13 drugs from
different classes. Particularly, HPV-positive HNSCC cells were more
sensitive to p38 MAPK and B-Raf inhibitors including LY2228820 (p <
0.01), regorafenib (p High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) is an
oncogenic virus associated with 90% of cervical cancers, over 60% of
oropharyngeal carcinoma cases and over 90% of anogenital cancers.
Although HPV-positive cancers are molecularly, clinically and
epidemiologically distinct from HPV-negative cancers, there are no
specific or targeted therapies for HPV-positive cancers. In order to
identify small molecule inhibitors that target HPV-positive cancers, we
performed a high throughput drug screen on 24 cervical cancer and head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines (12 HPV-positive and
12 HPV-negative) to determine if these cell lines display differential
sensitivity based on HPV status. HPV-positive cell lines with doubling
times of less than 72 hours were selected for the screen. Unsupervised
clustering of HNSCC cell lines based on protein expression levels
obtained from reverse phase protein array (RPPA) was used to select
matched HPV-negative cell lines by Spearman's rank-order correlation.
Cytotoxic chemotherapeutics and agents targeting a broad range of
processes including cell cycle control and DNA damage response were
obtained from commercial vendors and academic collaborators. Drug
sensitivity was measured by using nuclear staining to monitor cell death
and proliferation after 72h of treatment. The screen of 1062 unique
compounds at 6 different concentrations (0-3M) in 24 cell lines
represents 25,448 cell line drug interactions. To ensure the robustness
and reproducibility of the screen, the Z-factor and standard deviation
for biological replicates were calculated. A Z-factor greater 0.5 was
considered acceptable and the mean standard deviation across all drugs
for each cell line was 0.06. Drug sensitivity was determined by
calculating IC50 and area under the curve (AUC) values. Overall,
HPV-positive HNSCC cell lines showed greater sensitivity to 13 drugs from
different classes. Particularly, HPV-positive HNSCC cells were more
sensitive to p38 MAPK and B-Raf inhibitors including LY2228820 (p <
0.01), regorafenib (p < 0.01), sorafenib (p High-risk human
papillomavirus (HPV) is an oncogenic virus associated with 90% of
cervical cancers, over 60% of oropharyngeal carcinoma cases and over 90%
of anogenital cancers. Although HPV-positive cancers are molecularly,
clinically and epidemiologically distinct from HPV-negative cancers,
there are no specific or targeted therapies for HPV-positive cancers. In
order to identify small molecule inhibitors that target HPV-positive
cancers, we performed a high throughput drug screen on 24 cervical cancer
and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines (12
HPV-positive and 12 HPV-negative) to determine if these cell lines
display differential sensitivity based on HPV status. HPV-positive cell
lines with doubling times of less than 72 hours were selected for the
screen. Unsupervised clustering of HNSCC cell lines based on protein
expression levels obtained from reverse phase protein array (RPPA) was
used to select matched HPV-negative cell lines by Spearman's rank-order
correlation. Cytotoxic chemotherapeutics and agents targeting a broad
range of processes including cell cycle control and DNA damage response
were obtained from commercial vendors and academic collaborators. Drug
sensitivity was measured by using nuclear staining to monitor cell death
and proliferation after 72h of treatment. The screen of 1062 unique
compounds at 6 different concentrations (0-3M) in 24 cell lines
represents 25,448 cell line drug interactions. To ensure the robustness
and reproducibility of the screen, the Z-factor and standard deviation
for biological replicates were calculated. A Z-factor greater 0.5 was
considered acceptable and the mean standard deviation across all drugs
for each cell line was 0.06. Drug sensitivity was determined by
calculating IC50 and area under the curve (AUC) values. Overall,
HPV-positive HNSCC cell lines showed greater sensitivity to 13 drugs from
different classes. Particularly, HPV-positive HNSCC cells were more
sensitive to p38 MAPK and B-Raf inhibitors including LY2228820 (p <
0.01), regorafenib (p < 0.01), sorafenib (p < 0.05) and SB590885 (p
High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) is an oncogenic virus associated
with 90% of cervical cancers, over 60% of oropharyngeal carcinoma cases
and over 90% of anogenital cancers. Although HPV-positive cancers are
molecularly, clinically and epidemiologically distinct from HPV-negative
cancers, there are no specific or targeted therapies for HPV-positive
cancers. In order to identify small molecule inhibitors that target
HPV-positive cancers, we performed a high throughput drug screen on 24
cervical cancer and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell
lines (12 HPV-positive and 12 HPV-negative) to determine if these cell
lines display differential sensitivity based on HPV status. HPV-positive
cell lines with doubling times of less than 72 hours were selected for
the screen. Unsupervised clustering of HNSCC cell lines based on protein
expression levels obtained from reverse phase protein array (RPPA) was
used to select matched HPV-negative cell lines by Spearman's rank-order
correlation. Cytotoxic chemotherapeutics and agents targeting a broad
range of processes including cell cycle control and DNA damage response
were obtained from commercial vendors and academic collaborators. Drug
sensitivity was measured by using nuclear staining to monitor cell death
and proliferation after 72h of treatment. The screen of 1062 unique
compounds at 6 different concentrations (0-3M) in 24 cell lines
represents 25,448 cell line drug interactions. To ensure the robustness
and reproducibility of the screen, the Z-factor and standard deviation
for biological replicates were calculated. A Z-factor greater 0.5 was
considered acceptable and the mean standard deviation across all drugs
for each cell line was 0.06. Drug sensitivity was determined by
calculating IC50 and area under the curve (AUC) values. Overall,
HPV-positive HNSCC cell lines showed greater sensitivity to 13 drugs from
different classes. Particularly, HPV-positive HNSCC cells were more
sensitive to p38 MAPK and B-Raf inhibitors including LY2228820 (p <
0.01), regorafenib (p < 0.01), sorafenib (p < 0.05) and SB590885 (p <
0.05). On the other hand, HPV-negative HNSCC lines showed increased
sensitivity to 30 drugs among these, palbociclib (p High-risk human
papillomavirus (HPV) is an oncogenic virus associated with 90% of
cervical cancers, over 60% of oropharyngeal carcinoma cases and over 90%
of anogenital cancers. Although HPV-positive cancers are molecularly,
clinically and epidemiologically distinct from HPV-negative cancers,
there are no specific or targeted therapies for HPV-positive cancers. In
order to identify small molecule inhibitors that target HPV-positive
cancers, we performed a high throughput drug screen on 24 cervical cancer
and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines (12
HPV-positive and 12 HPV-negative) to determine if these cell lines
display differential sensitivity based on HPV status. HPV-positive cell
lines with doubling times of less than 72 hours were selected for the
screen. Unsupervised clustering of HNSCC cell lines based on protein
expression levels obtained from reverse phase protein array (RPPA) was
used to select matched HPV-negative cell lines by Spearman's rank-order
correlation. Cytotoxic chemotherapeutics and agents targeting a broad
range of processes including cell cycle control and DNA damage response
were obtained from commercial vendors and academic collaborators. Drug
sensitivity was measured by using nuclear staining to monitor cell death
and proliferation after 72h of treatment. The screen of 1062 unique
compounds at 6 different concentrations (0-3M) in 24 cell lines
represents 25,448 cell line drug interactions. To ensure the robustness
and reproducibility of the screen, the Z-factor and standard deviation
for biological replicates were calculated. A Z-factor greater 0.5 was
considered acceptable and the mean standard deviation across all drugs
for each cell line was 0.06. Drug sensitivity was determined by
calculating IC50 and area under the curve (AUC) values. Overall,
HPV-positive HNSCC cell lines showed greater sensitivity to 13 drugs from
different classes. Particularly, HPV-positive HNSCC cells were more
sensitive to p38 MAPK and B-Raf inhibitors including LY2228820 (p <
0.01), regorafenib (p < 0.01), sorafenib (p < 0.05) and SB590885 (p <
0.05). On the other hand, HPV-negative HNSCC lines showed increased
sensitivity to 30 drugs among these, palbociclib (p < 0.01), a CDK 4/6
inhibitor, and ryuvidine (p High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) is an
oncogenic virus associated with 90% of cervical cancers, over 60% of
oropharyngeal carcinoma cases and over 90% of anogenital cancers.
Although HPV-positive cancers are molecularly, clinically and
epidemiologically distinct from HPV-negative cancers, there are no
specific or targeted therapies for HPV-positive cancers. In order to
identify small molecule inhibitors that target HPV-positive cancers, we
performed a high throughput drug screen on 24 cervical cancer and head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines (12 HPV-positive and
12 HPV-negative) to determine if these cell lines display differential
sensitivity based on HPV status. HPV-positive cell lines with doubling
times of less than 72 hours were selected for the screen. Unsupervised
clustering of HNSCC cell lines based on protein expression levels
obtained from reverse phase protein array (RPPA) was used to select
matched HPV-negative cell lines by Spearman's rank-order correlation.
Cytotoxic chemotherapeutics and agents targeting a broad range of
processes including cell cycle control and DNA damage response were
obtained from commercial vendors and academic collaborators. Drug
sensitivity was measured by using nuclear staining to monitor cell death
and proliferation after 72h of treatment. The screen of 1062 unique
compounds at 6 different concentrations (0-3M) in 24 cell lines
represents 25,448 cell line drug interactions. To ensure the robustness
and reproducibility of the screen, the Z-factor and standard deviation
for biological replicates were calculated. A Z-factor greater 0.5 was
considered acceptable and the mean standard deviation across all drugs
for each cell line was 0.06. Drug sensitivity was determined by
calculating IC50 and area under the curve (AUC) values. Overall,
HPV-positive HNSCC cell lines showed greater sensitivity to 13 drugs from
different classes. Particularly, HPV-positive HNSCC cells were more
sensitive to p38 MAPK and B-Raf inhibitors including LY2228820 (p <
0.01), regorafenib (p < 0.01), sorafenib (p < 0.05) and SB590885 (p <
0.05). On the other hand, HPV-negative HNSCC lines showed increased
sensitivity to 30 drugs among these, palbociclib (p < 0.01), a CDK 4/6
inhibitor, and ryuvidine (p <0.05) which is reported to inhibit CDK 4. We
are currently in the process of performing mechanistic studies and
identifying genomic characteristics that influence sensitivity to B-Raf
and p38 MAPK inhibitors in HPV-associated cancers using the genomic
analyses and drug sensitivity data. Given the difference in clinical
outcomes based on HPV status, any validated chemical-genomic interactions
we discover will provide strong support for HPV-based treatment plans
that may improve efficacy, allow for dose de-escalation and prevent
permanent toxicity in patients.

