Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translating a mutant p53 reactivating drug (ZMC1) in murine
pancreatic cancer models


Pancreatic cancer therapy suffers from a lack of effective chemotherapy.
TP53 is second only to KRAS as the most commonly mutated gene in
pancreatic cancer with point mutations occurring in 75% of patients. We
identified ZMC1 as an allele specific mutant p53 reactivator and lead
compound for mutant p53 targeted drug development. ZMC1 restores wildtype
structure and function by functioning as a zinc metallochaperone to
restore zinc binding to mutant p53 proteins with impaired zinc binding.
Our aim was to translate this novel mechanism in vivo using murine
pancreatic cancer models. We investigated the pharmacokinetics (PK) and
pharmacodynamics (PD) of ZMC1 and performed efficacy studies for allele
specificity in nude mice with subcutaneous tumors from murine pancreatic
cancer cell lines derived from a genetically engineered mouse model (KPC)
expressing mutant KrasG12D and different alleles of TP53 (WT, null,
p53R172H, p53R270H). Tumor growth inhibition became apparent only in
KPCp53-R172H xenografts but not in KPCp53-R270H. We then performed
efficacy studies in the autochthonous KPC model and found that, ZMC1
extended the median survival from 15 to 26 days in the KPCp53-R172H mice
(p = 0.05) but not in the KPCp53-R270H mice. We sought to improve the
efficacy of ZMC1 by synthesizing it complexed with zinc (Zn-1) in a 2:1
molar ratio. Zn-1 significanlty increased the median survival of
KPCp53-R172H mice from 15 to 35 days (p = 0.0042). The apoptosis rate in
the tumors (by Immunohistochemistry staining with Cleaved Caspase 3) was
also increased by treatment of ZMC1 and Zn-1. These studies indicate that
ZMC1 can function in vivo as a mutant p53 targeted anti-cancer drug at
doses that are well tolerated. Furthermore, ZMC1 can be optimized by
synthesizing it complexed with zinc.

