Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Indolo-pyrido-isoquinolin based alkaloid inhibits
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and stemness via activation of
p53-miR34a axis


The tumor suppressor p53 plays a critical role in suppressing cancer
growth and progression and is the most frequently mutated and
functionally inactivated gene in all human malignancies. Owing to its
widespread alteration/inactivation in cancer, p53 is an attractive target
for the development of new targeted therapies. We synthesized several
indolo-pyrido-isoquinolin based alkaloids to restore/activate p53
function and examined their therapeutic efficacy using NCI-60 screening.
Here, we provide molecular evidence that one of these compounds,
11-Methoxy-2,3,4,13-tetrahydro-1H-indolo[2,3:3,4]pyrido[1,2-b]isoquinolin-6
-ylium-bromide (termed P18 or NSC-768219) inhibits growth and clonogenic
potential of cancer cells. P18 treatment results in downregulation of
mesenchymal markers and concurrent upregulation of epithelial markers as
well as inhibition of migration and invasion. Experimental
epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) induced by exposure to TGF/TNF is
also completely reversed by P18. Importantly, P18 also inhibits
mammosphere-formation along with a reduction in the expression of
stemness factors, Oct4, Nanog and Sox2. We show that P18 induces
expression, phosphorylation and accumulation of p53 in cancer cells.
P18-mediated induction of p53 leads to increased nuclear localization and
elevated expression of p53 target genes. Using isogenic cancer cells
differing only in p53 status, we show that the alteration of mesenchymal
and epithelial genes, inhibition of migration and invasion of cancer
cells mediated by P18 is p53-dependent. Furthermore, P18 increases
miR-34a expression in p53-dependent manner and inhibition of
mammosphere-formation by P18 is further enhanced by miR-34a mimic.
Collectively, these data provide evidence that p53-miR-34a activation by
P18 may represent a promising therapeutic strategy for the inhibition of
growth and progression of cancer.

