Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of peripheral blood S100A9+ myeloid-derived suppressor
cells and tumor-associated macrophages in lung adenocarcinoma patient


Background: Peripheral blood S100A9+ monocytic myeloid derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs) is a predictive factor for treatment response of
chemotherapy and epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) of lung adenocarcinoma patients. Tumor associated
macrophages (TAMs), which might derived from peripheral blood monocyte,
is also a predictive factor to treatment response of EGFR-TKI. However,
the correlation of S100A9+ monocytic MDSCs and TAMs is not well
understood in lung adenocarcinoma patients.Methods: Stage IV lung
adenocarcinoma patients with paired formalin fixed paraffin embedded
(FFPE) tumor tissue and peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMCs) were
enrolled. CD68+ cells were calculated in 3 different 200X microscopic
field of FFPE as TAMs, and S100A9+ cells also calculated with same method
as MDSCs in tumor microenvironment. S100A9+ MDSCs percentage was
calculated by flow cytometry from CD14+S100A9+ in PBMC.Results:
Twenty-four lung adenocarcinoma patients with paired FFPE tissue and PBMC
data were enrolled. PBMC S100A9+ MDSCs percentage is 17.9 13.6; average
number of S100A9+ cells and CD68+ TAMs in tumor tissue is 96.845.7 and
79.313.3, respectively. The correlation between S100A9+ MDSCs percentage
and tissue S100A9+ cells and CD68+ TAMs is significant (Spearman r =
0.54, p = 0.003 for S100A9+; Spearman r = 0.03, p = 0.03 for CD68; n =
24) CD68+ and S100A9+ cells were also correlated (Spearman r = 0.41, p =
0.04, n = 24). Clinically, high or low (cutoff value as median number)
tissue S100A9+ cells and CD68+ TAMs were both predictive factors for
treatment PFS for EGFR-TKI. (For CD68, median: 56, high vs low TAM PFS =
7.4 vs 15.4 months, p = 0.04; For S100A9+ cells, median: 76, high vs low
S100A9+ cells PFS = 7.2 vs 13.6 months, p = 0.05)Conclusion: Peripheral
blood S100A9+ MDSCs is well correlated to tumor tissue S100A9+ cells and
CD68+ TAMs. Both tissue S100A9+ cells and CD68+ TAMs were predictive
factors for EGFR-TKI PFS. Our study suggests that peripheral blood
S100A9+ monocytic MDSC might be one of the origin of tumor tissue CD68+
TAMs.

