Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparisons of genetic alterations of breast cancer between East
and West: Special emphases on young patients with ER+/HER2- tumors


A rapid surge of female breast cancer has been observed in young East
Asians. As a first step toward understanding this phenomenon, we compared
the genetic alterations between breast cancer form Taiwan (East) and
Western countries (West). Under the same array platforms, the differences
in gene copy number alterations (n = 120 in East and 1,948 in West) and
gene expressions (n = 327 in East and 423 in West) were analyzed as
further stratified by age and estrogen receptor (ER)/ HER2 status.
Gene-gene interaction networks were explored by analyzing the overlapping
gene with ingenuity pathway analysis. The ingenuity pathway analysis
revealed the common differences between East and West in NFkB, PI3K, Akt,
MAPK, ERK, IFN, and Jnk networks. Among the patients A rapid surge of
female breast cancer has been observed in young East Asians. As a first
step toward understanding this phenomenon, we compared the genetic
alterations between breast cancer form Taiwan (East) and Western
countries (West). Under the same array platforms, the differences in gene
copy number alterations (n = 120 in East and 1,948 in West) and gene
expressions (n = 327 in East and 423 in West) were analyzed as further
stratified by age and estrogen receptor (ER)/ HER2 status. Gene-gene
interaction networks were explored by analyzing the overlapping gene with
ingenuity pathway analysis. The ingenuity pathway analysis revealed the
common differences between East and West in NFkB, PI3K, Akt, MAPK, ERK,
IFN, and Jnk networks. Among the patients <50 years with ER+/ HER2-
tumors, we identified a uniquely higher frequency of the APOA1/C3/A4/A5
(the lipid metabolizing genes) gene cluster loss (29% vs. 12%, P = .005)
and low expressions of these four genes (East/ West ratios ranged from
.07 to .39) in East than that in West. We conclude that NFkB, PI3K, Akt,
MAPK, ERK, IFN, and Jnk networks are common differences between East and
West, while APOA1/C3/A4/A5 loss and low expressions are unique genetic
alterations for young Asian patients with ER+/ HER2- tumors.

