Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidemiological factors associated with breast cancer in young
women


Background: Although breast cancer in young women (YW, Background:
Although breast cancer in young women (YW, <40 years) only accounts for
7% of cases diagnosed annually, tumors in young patients have more
aggressive characteristics and higher mortality rates. The cost of breast
cancer increases significantly with more aggressive tumors in terms of
treatment costs, physical and psychosocial effects on the patient and her
family, and lost productivity. Improved understanding of factors
associated with etiology of breast cancer in YW is critical to developing
more effective prevention strategies and improved treatments, reducing
the burden of breast cancer in this population.Methods: The Clinical
Breast Care Project database was queried to identify all YW with invasive
breast cancer or benign breast conditions diagnosed after surgical
evaluation between 2001 and 2014 that had questionnaire data available
from the time of diagnosis. Epidemiological factors including
reproductive and health history and lifestyle choices were using
Student's t-tests and chi-square analysis with PBackground: Although
breast cancer in young women (YW, <40 years) only accounts for 7% of
cases diagnosed annually, tumors in young patients have more aggressive
characteristics and higher mortality rates. The cost of breast cancer
increases significantly with more aggressive tumors in terms of treatment
costs, physical and psychosocial effects on the patient and her family,
and lost productivity. Improved understanding of factors associated with
etiology of breast cancer in YW is critical to developing more effective
prevention strategies and improved treatments, reducing the burden of
breast cancer in this population.Methods: The Clinical Breast Care
Project database was queried to identify all YW with invasive breast
cancer or benign breast conditions diagnosed after surgical evaluation
between 2001 and 2014 that had questionnaire data available from the time
of diagnosis. Epidemiological factors including reproductive and health
history and lifestyle choices were using Student's t-tests and chi-square
analysis with P<0.05 defining significance.Results: Neither ethnicity nor
family history differed significantly between YW with and without breast
cancer. Reproductive factors that differed significantly between groups
include longer use of oral contraceptives (PBackground: Although breast
cancer in young women (YW, <40 years) only accounts for 7% of cases
diagnosed annually, tumors in young patients have more aggressive
characteristics and higher mortality rates. The cost of breast cancer
increases significantly with more aggressive tumors in terms of treatment
costs, physical and psychosocial effects on the patient and her family,
and lost productivity. Improved understanding of factors associated with
etiology of breast cancer in YW is critical to developing more effective
prevention strategies and improved treatments, reducing the burden of
breast cancer in this population.Methods: The Clinical Breast Care
Project database was queried to identify all YW with invasive breast
cancer or benign breast conditions diagnosed after surgical evaluation
between 2001 and 2014 that had questionnaire data available from the time
of diagnosis. Epidemiological factors including reproductive and health
history and lifestyle choices were using Student's t-tests and chi-square
analysis with P<0.05 defining significance.Results: Neither ethnicity nor
family history differed significantly between YW with and without breast
cancer. Reproductive factors that differed significantly between groups
include longer use of oral contraceptives (P<0.001, 93 compared to 66
months), older age at first full-term pregnancy (FFTP, P = 0.002, 24.5
compared to 22.7 years), and longer duration of breastfeeding in parous
YW (P = 0.024, 15.1 compared to 10.4 months) in YW with invasive breast
cancer compared to those with benign conditions. YW with invasive breast
cancer were also significantly more likely to be married (P = 0.043, 78%
compared to 68%) and less likely to exercise (P = 0.003, 31% compared to
17%) compared to those with benign breasts.Conclusions: Of the factors
evaluated, including reproductive history, lifestyle choices, and
co-morbidities, only five differed significantly between YW with and
without invasive breast cancer. Paradoxically, breastfeeding, which has
been associated with reduced the risk of breast cancer, was higher in YW
who developed invasive breast cancer. In contrast, parity and use of oral
contraceptives are associated with transient increases in breast cancer
risk. The older age at FFTP of YW with invasive breast cancer combined
with the significantly longer exposures to oral contraceptives may create
an environment within the breast favorable to tumor initiation and
progression.

