Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel adjuvants in triple negative breast cancer chemotherapy


Background: Obese patients develop more frequently triple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) that has not target therapy and are commonly treated with
chemotherapeutics. Leptin, whose levels are elevated in obesity, can
induce TNBC proliferation, angiogenesis and resistance to
chemotherapeutics. An antagonist for leptin receptor OB-R, leptin peptide
receptor antagonist 2 (LPrA2), has been shown to block leptin signaling
and decrease tumor progression. LPrA2 also countervails leptin induced
resistance to chemotherapeutic agents. We used pegylation or iron oxide
nanoparticle (IONPs) as adjuvants to increase LPrA2 solubility, stability
and effectiveness.Hypothesis: Conjugated LPrA2 will decrease TNBC cells
proliferation, expression of leptin target molecules and
tumorigenesis.Methods: Human TNBC and murine breast adenocarcinoma
derived cell line E0771 (progesterone and HER2 receptor negative) were
used. The E0771 cell line was generated from an estrogen receptor
positive (ER+) mammary adenocarcinoma isolated from a C57BL/6J mouse.
E0771 was made insensitive to estrogen by treatment with drug Tamoxifen
(TAM) mimicking TNBC. To specifically assess the role of RBP-Jk (CBS/CSL,
an essential transcription factor for Notch signaling) the CRISPR/Cas9
system was used to disrupt RBP-JK gene expression in both wild-type and
TAM treated E0771 cells. Cells were treated with chemotherapeutics
(Paclitaxel, Doxorubicine, Ciclophosphamide) in presence of leptin and
LPrA2-conjugates. The expression of leptin-targeted molecules, Breast
Cancer Stem Cells (BCSC) and EMT markers were analyzed after cell
treatment.Results: Chemotherapeutics effects on proliferation, survival
and molecular markers were modified by the addition of LPrA2-conjugates.
Notch molecules (receptors and ligands) were downregulated by LPrA2
treatment.Conclusion: The current data indicate that Leptin inhibition
could be used as an adjuvant for chemotherapeutic treatments in TNBC
patients. LPrA2-conjugates could increase the efficacy of
chemotherapy.Acknowledgements: This work was partially supported by the
National Institute of Health and National Cancer Institute Grant U54
CA118638, NIH/SBIR 1R41CA183399-01A1, and DOD Idea Award BC
W81XWH-13-1-0382 to RRGP; and facilities, and support services at
Morehouse School of Medicine (NIH RR03034 and 1C06 RR18386) and NIH/NCRR
grant 1G12RR026250-03.

