Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational clinical utility of a circulating neuroendocrine
tumor transcript measurement


Background:A key issue in the clinical management of
gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NET) is early
identification and the prediction of disease progression or recurrence.
Strategies include imaging and biomarker measurement e.g., CgA or NSE.
The former is limited by sensitivity and the latter by low specificity
and poor reproducibility. We evaluated the role of a blood-based
multianalyte gene algorithmic analysis (MAAA) using a 51 NET gene
signature (NETest) as an alternative circulating biomarker and assessed
its clinical utility in GEP-NET.Patients and Methods:We investigated 180
well-differentiated GEP-NET (small intestine: n = 93, pancreatic: n = 52,
colorectal: n = 11, stomach: n = 3, appendix: n = 2 and CUP: n = 19;
histological grade: G1: n = 80, G2: n = 86, no data: n = 14). Baseline
imaging (SRI: n = 103, CT/MRI: n = 77) were available. Surgery was
undertaken in 27 and 28 had somatostatin analog (SSA) therapy. Disease
recurrence or progression (RECIST 1.0 criteria) was determined by CT/MRI
in treated cohorts. Transcript analysis was by qPCR and multianalyte
algorithmic analysis. NETest defines disease activity risk: Background:A
key issue in the clinical management of gastroenteropancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NET) is early identification and the
prediction of disease progression or recurrence. Strategies include
imaging and biomarker measurement e.g., CgA or NSE. The former is limited
by sensitivity and the latter by low specificity and poor
reproducibility. We evaluated the role of a blood-based multianalyte gene
algorithmic analysis (MAAA) using a 51 NET gene signature (NETest) as an
alternative circulating biomarker and assessed its clinical utility in
GEP-NET.Patients and Methods:We investigated 180 well-differentiated
GEP-NET (small intestine: n = 93, pancreatic: n = 52, colorectal: n = 11,
stomach: n = 3, appendix: n = 2 and CUP: n = 19; histological grade: G1:
n = 80, G2: n = 86, no data: n = 14). Baseline imaging (SRI: n = 103,
CT/MRI: n = 77) were available. Surgery was undertaken in 27 and 28 had
somatostatin analog (SSA) therapy. Disease recurrence or progression
(RECIST 1.0 criteria) was determined by CT/MRI in treated cohorts.
Transcript analysis was by qPCR and multianalyte algorithmic analysis.
NETest defines disease activity risk: <14%: negative, 80% high.
Transcripts measured by the NETest included genes involved in
proliferation e.g., Ki-67, growth factor signaling e.g., RAF pathway and
somatostatin receptor expression. Statistical analyses included
regression analyses, performance metrics analysis and progression-free
survival (PFS: Kaplan-Meier).Results:The NETest was positive in 175 (97%)
with image-proven GEP-NET. In the surgical samples, matched blood/ tumor
sample were significantly correlated (R2 = 0.7, p80% high. Transcripts
measured by the NETest included genes involved in proliferation e.g.,
Ki-67, growth factor signaling e.g., RAF pathway and somatostatin
receptor expression. Statistical analyses included regression analyses,
performance metrics analysis and progression-free survival (PFS:
Kaplan-Meier).Results:The NETest was positive in 175 (97%) with
image-proven GEP-NET. In the surgical samples, matched blood/ tumor
sample were significantly correlated (R2 = 0.7, p<0.0001) and gene
expression regulating tumor proliferation, growth factor signaling and
somatostatin receptor expression were concordant (R2 = 0.42-0.8, p40%)
predicted recurrence (100%). Baseline disease status (RECIST) was
concordant with the NETest in 84% of the 62 evaluable patients; metrics
were: sensitivity: 100%, specificity: 70%, PPV: 80% and NPV: 100%. In 28
patients treated with SSAs, NETest at baseline predicted treatment
response (median PFS: 245 days NETest >80% vs. undetermined, NETest80%)
in the NETest occurred 105 days (48-252) prior to image-proven disease
progression.Conclusions:A blood-based NET MAAA accurately correlated
(97%) with image-proven disease. Blood levels were concordant with tissue
and correlated with genes regulating tumor activity. NETest levels were
decreased by surgery and elevated levels (>40%) were predictive (100%) of
recurrence. NETest levels were also correlated (84%) with clinical
disease status (RECIST) and values >80% predicted disease progression
(100%) on somatostatin analogs.

