Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ALDH2 rs671 polymorphism and alcohol consumption in the risk of
gastric cancer: A Mendelian randomization study


Background: The effect of increased alcohol consumption on the risk for
gastric cancer (GC) has not been fully elucidated, due to the presence of
confounders and gender differences. In this study, aldehyde dehydrogenase
2 (ALDH2) rs671, the genetic polymorphism related to the elimination of
acetaldehyde, was used as an instrumental variable (IV) for Mendelian
randomization analysis to dissect the role of alcohol in GC risk.Methods:
The study included Korean 450 GC cases and 1,050 controls recruited at
the National Cancer Center. Data of 795 GC patients and 4,893 controls
from the Korean Centers for Disease Control were used for further
validation. The odds ratios (OR) for the ALDH2 genotype and its
interaction with alcohol consumption were estimated using multivariate
logistic regression. The two-stage control function method was performed
using rs671 as the IV for alcohol consumption.Results: All AG carriers
had an OR of 1.26 (95% confidence interval, 1.11-1.42) compared with GG
carriers. In a quantitative analysis of alcohol intake, the conventional
OR was 1.21(1.09-1.36) and the IV-OR was 0.90(0.63-1.28). Females had low
alcohol consumption and did not show a significant risk for GC while
males had a high risk for GC.Conclusions: Alcohol consumption is not
associated with a risk for GC by itself, and ALDH2 polymorphism should be
considered simultaneously when assessing the risk. Females did not
display an evident risk for GC regarding alcohol, partly due to their
lower level of alcohol consumption. However, further dissection of gender
difference is necessary.

