Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Hedgehog signaling in the regulation of human colon
cancer stem cells


Recent data support a hierarchical model of colon cancer in which tumor
growth is driven by a subpopulation of cancer stem cells (CSCs) that may
also be the source of relapse following treatment. Elucidation of the
cellular heterogeneity within a tumor would therefore facilitate better
characterization of patient subtypes and lead to more personalized and
effective treatments. Here, as part of the OncoTrack* consortium, we
report the use of Matrigel-based 3D in vitro models of patient-derived
colon cancer for the characterization of molecular pathways important in
the regulation of CSC self-renewal and survival.Cellular subpopulations
were isolated from patient-derived 3D-culture models based on expression
of the CSC marker aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) and then functionally
tested for tumor initiation and self-renewal capacity by limiting
dilution serial xenotransplantation. These studies demonstrate CSCs to be
ALDH+. ALDH+ and ALDH- cells from 3D-culture and xenograft models were
then subjected to RNA sequencing for whole transcriptome analysis.These
analyses demonstrated ALDH+ CSCs cells to be enriched for stem cell
associated genes (ALDH1A1, LGR5, BMI1, CD44, CD166), developmental
processes (embryonic, tissue development, EMT) and signaling pathways
(Wnt signaling). In particular, the Hedgehog signaling pathway was found
to be enriched in both 3D in vitro and xenograft models.The role of
Hedgehog signaling in colon cancer remains controversial. It has been
reported as a negative regulator of Wnt signaling and to be inactive in
colon cancer cells lines. Here, using small molecule inhibitors and
lentivirus mediated gene knockdown, we report on the role of Hedgehog
signaling in the regulation of colon CSC self-renewal and identify
non-canonical Hedgehog signaling as a positive regulator of Wnt
signaling.*The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Union's Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013) for
the Innovative Medicine Initiative under grant agreement n115234.

