Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer immunotherapy biomarker profiling assay


Selecting patients predisposed to respond to existing and novel
immunotherapy treatments requires the development of novel prognostic and
predictive biomarkers. Recent reports have identified several gene
expression signatures specific for immunity status and immune contexture
in solid tumor microenvironments, and these enable predictions of
efficacy of a number of chemo- and immunotherapeutics. Robust methods for
molecular characterizations of the immune mechanism in the tumor
microenvironment are essential to meet the imminent need for diagnostic
approaches that identify patient populations responsive to the growing
number of immunotherapeutic treatments. Toward this goal, we developed
the Cancer ImmuneNet 2500 (CIN2500) assay for profiling cellular
composition in the tumor microenvironment and discovery of novel
prognostic and predictive immune response biomarkers.The CIN2500 panel
provides signatures for approximately 400 immunity-related genes from 16
predictive and prognostic core genes that have been validated in recent
chemo- and immunotherapy clinical trials across several tumor types,
including melanoma, colorectal, breast, and lung cancers. In addition,
using computational analysis of an immunotherapy network model, we
predicted and included in the assay approximately 300 key nodes in
pathways specific for antigen presentation and recognition, inhibition,
activation and motility of immune cells, and adhesion and apoptosis of
cancer cells. The CIN2500 panel also includes a comprehensive set of
1,700 genes specific for detection and quantitative profiling in the
tumor microenvironment of different types of activated immune cells of
adaptive and innate immunity, and stromal, fibroblast, cancer,
endothelial and adipose cell types.The CIN2500 assay quantitatively
profiles the expression levels of approximately 2,500 key cancer genes
from 10-100ng of total RNA using multiplex RT-PCR amplification followed
by Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS). Built-in standards for each gene
target enable sample-to-sample calibration of the NGS data and provide a
reference to adjust for background noise that often depends on the
quality of samples. Control studies have shown that the CIN2500 assay
quantifiably measures 4 orders of magnitude variation in the expression
levels of 2,500 immune-related genes from as few as 100 cells in whole
lysate, and profiles from frozen biopsies, surgically-removed tumor
samples, PBMCs, and FFPE clinical samples show a comparable range and
sensitivity. We will present profiling data from infiltrating immune
cells and key intact and deficient immune mechanisms in the tumor
microenvironment of breast cancer samples to demonstrate the performance
and utility of the CIN2500 assay.

