Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T cell repertoire diversification is associated with immune
related toxicities following immune checkpoint inhibition in metastatic
cancer patients


Immune checkpoint inhibitors can induce clinical responses to a broad
range of tumor types by presumably enhancing T cell responses against the
tumor. These treatments are also associated with certain side effects
that are also thought to be immune mediated (termed immune-related
adverse events, or IRAEs). The mechanism by which IRAEs occur, and
biomarkers that may predict IRAE development, are unknown. In prior work
(Cha et al. Sci Transl Med 2014), we demonstrated that treating
metastatic cancer patients with checkpoint inhibitors blocking CTLA-4 can
lead to T cell repertoire diversification. However, we found that
prolonged survival was not associated with the induction of high
frequency clonotypes, but rather the maintenance of a pre-existing T cell
response. Here, we examined whether treatment-induced TCR diversification
is related to another clinical outcome: the development of IRAEs. We find
that IRAEs are specifically associated with a more diverse T cell
repertoire and with an increase in the number of T cell clonotypes,
including the generation of de novo clones. This broadening of the
circulating T cell repertoire occurred early with treatment, preceding
the development of IRAEs. While IRAE patients demonstrate markedly
greater diversity in their CD4+ T cells, they demonstrate a greater
degree of change in clonal frequencies in their CD8+ T cells after
ipilimumab, which may have key implications in the pathogenic mechanism
of IRAE development. Finally, clinical response to checkpoint blockade is
also associated with increased diversity. These results indicate that
immune repertoire diversity following immune checkpoint inhibition can be
both detrimental and beneficial to patients with metastatic cancer.

