Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective serum metabolomic profiles of prostate cancer by size
and extent of primary tumor


Background: Recent studies have identified serum metabolites related to
aggressive prostate cancer up to 20 years prior to diagnosis. Lipid and
energy metabolites were significantly lower in cases vs. controls,
including glycerophospholipids, inositol-1-phosphate,
alpha-ketoglutarate, and citrate. To elucidate whether the findings
represent an etiologic process or biomarkers of subclinical disease, we
focused on differences in the prospective serum metabolomic profiles of
men with T2, T3, and T4 prostate cancers.Methods: Clinical data from a
nested case-control analysis of prostate cancer in the ATBC Study cohort
were examined, including 71 cases diagnosed with T2 primary cancer, 51
with T3, and 15 with T4 (all cases, ages 61-89 years at diagnosis).
Median time from fasting serum collection to diagnosis was 10 yr, range
1-20 yr. Cases in each extent of disease category were compared to a
common set of 200 non-case controls. Serum samples were analyzed on a
high resolution accurate mass platform of ultrahigh performance liquid
chromatography/mass spectroscopy and gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy
(Metabolon, Inc.), and 654 known metabolites were identified.
Unconditional logistic regression models estimated odds ratios (OR) and
95% confidence intervals (CI) for cancer associated with a one standard
deviation (1-SD) increment in metabolite concentration.Results: Among the
strongest serum metabolite signals for men with T2 prostate cancers were
N-acetyl-3-methylhistidine, 2-deoxyuridine, 3-methylhistidine,
beta-hydroxyisovalerate, stearoylarachidonoyl-GPPE, and
euricoyl-sphingomyelin [1-SD ORs 1.79, 1.71, 1.38, 1.48, 0.73, and 1.48
(p = 0.0002, 0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.02, and 0.02), respectively]. Men
diagnosed with T3 cancer exhibited a lipid metabolite profile most
similar to that previously reported for aggressive disease, with top
metabolite signals being for oleoyl-linoleoyl-GPPI,
palmitoyl-linoleoyl-GPPI, cholate, inositol-1-phosphate,
stearoyl-sphingomyelin, and 4-imidazoleacetate (ORs 0.49, 0.56, 0.57,
0.60, 1.54, and 1.59 (p = 0.00002, 0.001, 0.002, 0.003, 0.01, and 0.01),
respectively). Men with more extensive T4 cancers showed secondary bile
acid and caffeine metabolite associations including orotate,
taurodeoxycholate, glycodeoxycholate, caffeine, 4-imidazoleacetate,
1,3,7-trimethylurate, and deoxycholate (ORs 0.40, 2.62, 3.19, 2.40, 2.52,
2.31, and 3.31 (p = 0.004, 0.007, 0.007, 0.01, 0.01, 0.02, and 0.02),
respectively).Conclusions: In this analysis, men with T2, T3, and T4
prostate cancer primaries exhibited qualitative differences in their
serum metabolite profiles years in advance of the clinical diagnoses.
Whether these differences represent novel biomarkers related to greater
primary tumor mass that individual patients might transition through
while still undiagnosed is unknown but testable through additional
clinical series.

