Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross-disciplinary methods for personalizing screening modalities
for early gastric cancer intervention


Background.Up to 80% of patients in the early stages of gastric cancer
are asymptomatic, making early diagnosis and hence effective treatment
challenging. The poor prognosis of patients with late diagnoses clearly
necessitates the identification of markers for early detection and the
development of streamlined screening protocols. This is particularly
crucial in high-risk populations, for example regions in which
Helicobacter Pylori infection and associated chronic inflammation,
responsible for over 70% of gastric cancers worldwide, is prevalent. At
present, an efficient and personalized program for early detection does
not exist.Methods.Specific biomarkers for the progression of gastric
cancer have been identified in preliminary studies, including CD44, Lgr5
and CD133. In retrospective tissue samples incremental increases in
expression of these markers was observed during the progression from
normal gastric tissue to precancerous histologic lesions such as
intestinal metaplasia and ultimately dysplasia and carcinoma. We
developed a mechanistic mathematical model capable of simulating these
marker-positive population dynamics, calibrated using the existing
clinical data. The predictive capability of the model is validated by
comparison of simulated to actual marker expression patterns in an
independent test cohort of endoscopic gastric biopsies taken at
sequential points during individual patients disease
progression.Results.Based on clinically obtainable, patient-specific
tissue conditions, the computational model can simulate the dynamics of
marker-positive cells and, when calibrated and validated with clinical
data from specific patient populations, may forecast disease progression
and suggest optimal screening schedules for individual
patients.Conclusions.The tools of mathematical oncology have the
potential to directly inform clinical screening protocols. Verified
prognostic factors for disease progression can be incorporated into
mathematical models to improve diagnostic accuracy and allow
clinically-actionable screening optimization. This can guide personalized
screening schedules according to current marker expression on a
case-by-case basis to achieve more efficient prognosis and reduced
healthcare costs.

