Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In silico evaluation of DNA-damage-inducible transcript 4 gene
(DDIT4) in the outcome of several malignant tumors


Objectives: Although DDIT4 gene encodes a protein whose main action is to
inhibit mTOR. There are not previous reports relating this gene with the
clinical outcome in cancer patients. Our aim was to explore the influence
of this gene in the clinical characteristics and the outcome of malignant
tumors.Methods: We evaluated in an in silico study of publicly available
datasets, influence of DDIT4 expression in the clinical outcome in terms
of either disease-free survival (DFS), progression free survival (PFS) or
overall survival (OS), according to the availability of this variable in
the dataset. KM Plotter (http://kmplot.com/) and SurvExpress
(http://bioinformatica.mty.itesm.mx/) were used to evaluate the influence
of DDIT4 gene in the outcome (either DFS, PFS or OS). cbioportal.org was
used to explore structural gene changes. The median of expression
discriminate two groups at different risk. Twelve types of cancer were
evaluated including. Acute Myeloid Leukemia, Brain Cancer, Breast Cancer,
Bone Cancer, Cervical Cancer, Head and Neck Cancer, Hematological Cancer,
Liver Cancer, Lung Cancer, Pancreatic Cancer, Ovarian Cancer and Prostate
CancerResults: DDIT4 had low structural alterations rates (0-5.1%);
however, in breast tumors xenografts, gene amplification occurs in 17.4%,
indicating a key role in tumor progression. High levels of DDIT4 was
significantly associated with a worse outcome in breast cancer (n =
4142), P = 310-14 (HR = 1.64, CI95%: 1.44-1.87). In this malignancy, high
DDIT4 expression was associated with the triple negative phenotype and
higher pathological complete response rates. In addition High DDIT4 level
was associated to a worse outcome in acute myeloid leukemia (n = 168), P
= 3.4710-5 (HR = 2.31, CI95%:1.55-3.43), glioblastoma multiforme (n =
538), P = 0.005809 (HR = 1.31, CI95%:1.08-1.59); ovarian cancer (n =
1648), P = 0.0096 (HR = 1.2, IC95%:1.04- 1.37); head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (n = 283), P = 0.03347 (HR = 1.49, IC95%:1.03-2.15) and
lung adenocarcinoma (n = 866), P = 0.0038 (HR = 1.4, CI95%: 1.02-1.91).
In contrast, a high level of DDIT4 was associated with a better prognosis
in gastric cancer (n = 641), P = 1.710-6 (HR = 0.62, CI95%:0.5-0.75) and
lung squamous cell carcinoma (n = 675), P = 0.0015 (HR = 0.42,
IC95%:0.24-0.73).Conclusion: Although DDIT4 structural alterations are
infrequent, its dysregulation impact in the clinical outcome in several
types of cancer. DDIT4 is an attractive target to improve the therapeutic
strategies, mainly those related with mTOR inhibition.

