Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adjuvant immunotherapy targeting CSF1R to limit metastatic
progression


Metastasis is often considered a late stage event, although the first
changes in the metastatic site occur very early during localized primary
tumor development. Although understanding of these initiating events is
limited, immune suppression plays an essential role in allowing for the
outgrowth of disseminating tumor cells. Targeting this immune suppressive
milieu can hold promise to effectively inhibit metastatic progression.
Colony stimulating factor-one (CSF-1) is overexpressed by many diverse
tumor types and can induce expansion and recruitment of CSF-1 receptor
(CSF-1R) expressing cells. CSF-1R is expressed on a multitude of myeloid
cells including inflammatory monocytes, myeloid derived suppressor cells
and macrophages, which are key immune suppressive cells in a primary
tumor site. Using a metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma model, we have identified
expansion of immune suppressive myeloid cells in the early metastatic
microenvironment. PLX3397, which is small molecular inhibitor that
selectively targets CSF-1R, Kit and Oncogenic FLT3, was used to determine
the impact of targeting this immune suppressive microenvironment in
limiting metastatic progression. PLX3397 and GW2580, a selective CSF1R
inhibitor, reduce the immune suppressive capacity of bone marrow-derived
monocytes on activated T cells. Adjuvant therapy with PLX3397 in resected
rhabdomyosarcoma reduces metastatic spread. Targeting CSF-1R is
associated with an expansion of CD11C expressing antigen presenting cells
in the metastatic tissue and in combination with PD-1 blockade improves
anti-tumor immunity. Continued investigation of combination immunotherapy
with metastatic microenvironment targeting in the adjuvant setting holds
promise to limit metastatic spread.

