Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterozygous ATG7 inhibition enhances endocrine therapy
responsiveness through regulation of damage associated molecular patterns
and priming the immune system in ER+ breast tumors


Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women, with over 230,000
new cases diagnosed annually. The most common type of breast cancer,
comprising over 70% of all cases, express the estrogen receptor (ER);
these tumors are usually treated with an endocrine therapy such as an
antiestrogen or aromatase inhibitor. Unfortunately, many of these tumors
develop resistance, or in some instances express de novo resistance,
which limits the curative potential of these therapies. Autophagy, a
cellular process of self-eating, is implicated as possible contributor to
endocrine therapy resistance in breast cancer. We previously showed that
inhibiting autophagy through low-dose chloroquine treatment reversed
antiestrogen therapy resistance in ER+ orthotopic breast tumors. We now
show that heterozygous deletion of ATG7 decreased breast tumor
multiplicity and increased endocrine targeting therapy sensitivity in a
DMBA-model of ER+ mammary carcinogenesis. Knockdown of ATG7 through RNAi
increased cytoplasmic to nuclear high-mobility group binding protein B1
(HMGB1) protein ratio, suggesting targeting ATG7 promotes damage
associated molecular patterns (DAMP) signaling. Heterozygous deletion of
ATG7 also increased cytoplasmic HMGB1 protein expression in tumor
epithelial cells indicating targeting ATG7 promotes DAMP signaling in
vivo. Furthermore, tumors from ATG7 heterozygous mice displayed increased
CD68 staining indicating elevated macrophage infiltration. Corroborating
previous literature showing the critical role of autophagy in T-cell
maturation, splenic CD8+ T-cells were significantly reduced in tumor
bearing ATG7 heterozygous mice. However, ATG7 heterozygous mice displayed
increased tumor CD8+ T-cell population. These data suggest that while
targeting ATG7 reduces overall circulating T-cell populations, inhibiting
ATG7 enhances tumoral cytotoxic T-cell recruitment. Tumors from ATG7
heterozygous mice also showed a significant decrease in foxp3+ cells,
indicating targeting ATG7 reduces immuno-suppressive T-reg population.
Serum from ATG7 heterozygous mice showed increased circulating MDC,
MCP-1, IL-6, and eotaxin cytokines. Taken together, these data suggests
that ATG7 inhibition promotes an anti-tumor pro-inflammatory cytokine
profile to enhance tumoral immune cell recruitment and promote endocrine
therapy responsiveness.

