Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personalizing the synergy of focal radiation and immunotherapy


Tumors grow within a host tissue that both facilitates progression by
supplying nutrients and growth factors, and inhibits it through physical
constraints and immune surveillance. Transformed cancer cells are
confronted with this innate and adaptive immune surveillance, and tumors
that develop to become clinically apparent have evolved to evade the
immune system. This complex ecological system may be tipped back in favor
of effective immune surveillance and tumor regression through novel
immunotherapeutic strategies, particularly when used in concert with
focal cytotoxic agents such as radiotherapy.We developed a multi-scale
mathematical model framework to simulate local tumor-immune interactions
as well as systemic distribution patterns of T cells activated locally in
each metastatic site. We simulate focal radiotherapy-induced cytotoxicity
and subsequent activation of an adaptive immune response, which may
propagate systemically to cause regression of unirradiated metastases,
known as the abscopal effect. We simulate concurrent anti-CTLA4
immunotherapy to investigate synergy.Model simulations suggest that
systemic distribution of locally activated T cells is dependent on (i)
the anatomical distribution of metastatic sites, (ii) the tumor volume of
each metastasis, (iii) the site of focal therapy, (iv) the local therapy
protocol of immune activation, and (v) the timing of concurrent
immunotherapy. We find that irradiation of different metastatic sites has
different likelihoods of inducing systemic tumor regressions.The
developed framework can identify combination therapy protocols that
optimally harness the synergy of focal therapy-induced immunity with
immunotherapy, and identify optimum treatment targets on a per patient
basis.

