Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A randomized phase 2 clinical trial of PEITC on detoxification of
tobacco-specific and non-specific carcinogens and toxicants


AbstractBackground: Cigarette smoke contains the tobacco-specific lung
carcinogen NNK and other carcinogens and toxicants. 2-Phenethyl
isothiocyanate (PEITC), a natural product found as a conjugate in
cruciferous vegetables, can inhibit the metabolic activation and lung
carcinogenicity of NNK in rodents. Intake of a broccoli sprout beverage
containing high levels of sulforaphane can increase urinary excretion of
benzene and acrolein metaboites. Glutathione S-transferases (GST)
catalyze the conjugation of carcinogens and toxicants with glutathione
enhancing their urinary excretion, thus functional GST genotypes may
modify the effect of PEITC.Methods. The goal of this randomized phase 2
clinical trial with a crossover was to determine if PEITC inhibits the
metabolic activation of NNK and enhances the detoxification of benzene,
acrolein and crotonaldehyde. Eighty-two smokers were completed the trial.
The smokers smoked cigarettes containing deuterium labeled
[pyridine-D4]NNK to allow measurement of metabolic activation. The
subjects were randomly assigned to one of two arms: PEITC-placebo, or
placebo-PEITC. During the 1-week treatment period, each subject took
PEITC (10 mg in 1 ml of olive oil, 4 times per day). There was a 1-week
washout period between the PEITC and placebo periods. Three 24h urine
samples were collected during each of the 2 treatment periods. The NNK
metabolic activation ratio: [pyridine-D4]hydroxy acid/total
[pyridine-D4]NNAL, and the mercapturic acids of benzene, acrolein and
crotonaldehye in urine were quantified using validated LC-ESI-MS/MS
methods. The linear mixed model with random effect was used to examine
the PEITC effect.Results. Overall, PEITC treatment significantly reduced
the NNK metabolic activation ratio by 7.7% (P = 0.023), and increased the
detoxification metabolites of benzene by 24.6% (P = 0.002) and acrolein
by 15.1% (P = 0.005), but had no effect on crotonaldehyde (5.5%, P =
0.148). PEITC had stronger effects in subjects with GST null genotype.
PEITC reduced the NNK metabolic activation ratio by 15.6% (P = 0.039),and
increased detoxification metabolites of benzene by 95.4% (P
AbstractBackground: Cigarette smoke contains the tobacco-specific lung
carcinogen NNK and other carcinogens and toxicants. 2-Phenethyl
isothiocyanate (PEITC), a natural product found as a conjugate in
cruciferous vegetables, can inhibit the metabolic activation and lung
carcinogenicity of NNK in rodents. Intake of a broccoli sprout beverage
containing high levels of sulforaphane can increase urinary excretion of
benzene and acrolein metaboites. Glutathione S-transferases (GST)
catalyze the conjugation of carcinogens and toxicants with glutathione
enhancing their urinary excretion, thus functional GST genotypes may
modify the effect of PEITC.Methods. The goal of this randomized phase 2
clinical trial with a crossover was to determine if PEITC inhibits the
metabolic activation of NNK and enhances the detoxification of benzene,
acrolein and crotonaldehyde. Eighty-two smokers were completed the trial.
The smokers smoked cigarettes containing deuterium labeled
[pyridine-D4]NNK to allow measurement of metabolic activation. The
subjects were randomly assigned to one of two arms: PEITC-placebo, or
placebo-PEITC. During the 1-week treatment period, each subject took
PEITC (10 mg in 1 ml of olive oil, 4 times per day). There was a 1-week
washout period between the PEITC and placebo periods. Three 24h urine
samples were collected during each of the 2 treatment periods. The NNK
metabolic activation ratio: [pyridine-D4]hydroxy acid/total
[pyridine-D4]NNAL, and the mercapturic acids of benzene, acrolein and
crotonaldehye in urine were quantified using validated LC-ESI-MS/MS
methods. The linear mixed model with random effect was used to examine
the PEITC effect.Results. Overall, PEITC treatment significantly reduced
the NNK metabolic activation ratio by 7.7% (P = 0.023), and increased the
detoxification metabolites of benzene by 24.6% (P = 0.002) and acrolein
by 15.1% (P = 0.005), but had no effect on crotonaldehyde (5.5%, P =
0.148). PEITC had stronger effects in subjects with GST null genotype.
PEITC reduced the NNK metabolic activation ratio by 15.6% (P = 0.039),and
increased detoxification metabolites of benzene by 95.4% (P <0.001),
acrolein by 32.7% (P = 0.034), and crotonaldehyde by 29.8% (P = 0.006)
among the subjects with null genotype of both GSTM1 and GSTT1, but had no
effect in those possessing both genes (Pinteraction AbstractBackground:
Cigarette smoke contains the tobacco-specific lung carcinogen NNK and
other carcinogens and toxicants. 2-Phenethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC), a
natural product found as a conjugate in cruciferous vegetables, can
inhibit the metabolic activation and lung carcinogenicity of NNK in
rodents. Intake of a broccoli sprout beverage containing high levels of
sulforaphane can increase urinary excretion of benzene and acrolein
metaboites. Glutathione S-transferases (GST) catalyze the conjugation of
carcinogens and toxicants with glutathione enhancing their urinary
excretion, thus functional GST genotypes may modify the effect of
PEITC.Methods. The goal of this randomized phase 2 clinical trial with a
crossover was to determine if PEITC inhibits the metabolic activation of
NNK and enhances the detoxification of benzene, acrolein and
crotonaldehyde. Eighty-two smokers were completed the trial. The smokers
smoked cigarettes containing deuterium labeled [pyridine-D4]NNK to allow
measurement of metabolic activation. The subjects were randomly assigned
to one of two arms: PEITC-placebo, or placebo-PEITC. During the 1-week
treatment period, each subject took PEITC (10 mg in 1 ml of olive oil, 4
times per day). There was a 1-week washout period between the PEITC and
placebo periods. Three 24h urine samples were collected during each of
the 2 treatment periods. The NNK metabolic activation ratio:
[pyridine-D4]hydroxy acid/total [pyridine-D4]NNAL, and the mercapturic
acids of benzene, acrolein and crotonaldehye in urine were quantified
using validated LC-ESI-MS/MS methods. The linear mixed model with random
effect was used to examine the PEITC effect.Results. Overall, PEITC
treatment significantly reduced the NNK metabolic activation ratio by
7.7% (P = 0.023), and increased the detoxification metabolites of benzene
by 24.6% (P = 0.002) and acrolein by 15.1% (P = 0.005), but had no effect
on crotonaldehyde (5.5%, P = 0.148). PEITC had stronger effects in
subjects with GST null genotype. PEITC reduced the NNK metabolic
activation ratio by 15.6% (P = 0.039),and increased detoxification
metabolites of benzene by 95.4% (P <0.001), acrolein by 32.7% (P =
0.034), and crotonaldehyde by 29.8% (P = 0.006) among the subjects with
null genotype of both GSTM1 and GSTT1, but had no effect in those
possessing both genes (Pinteraction < 0.05).Conclusion. The results of
this trial demonstrate that PEITC inhibits the metabolic activation of
NNK in smokers, and has a stronger effect on the detoxification of
environmental carcinogens and toxicants such as benzene, acrolein, and
crotonaldehyde. A more pronounced effect of PEITC in subjects lacking
both GSTM1 and GSTT1 genes supports the epidemiological findings of
stronger protection of dietary isothiocyanates against the development of
lung cancer in such individuals. [Grant support: NCI R01CA122244].

