Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of interferon inducible genes with tumor immune
microenvironment and chemotherapy resistance in high-grade serous
epithelial ovarian cancer


Chemotherapy resistance is a major hurdle in high-grade serous epithelial
ovarian cancer (HGSC) management. We previously reported differential
expression of interferon inducible genes in pre-treatment tumours from
chemoresistant and sensitive HGSC tumors. STAT1 expression was evaluated
as a prognostic and predictive biomarker via immunohistochemistry in
Phase I (n = 183) and Phase II (n = 550) biomarker validation studies
conducted on HGSC tumours accrued from the Terry Fox Research Institute-
Canadian Ovarian Experimental Unified Resource (TFRI-COEUR). Tumor STAT1
expression levels significantly correlated with the density of tumor
infiltrating CD8+ T lymphocytes in both Phase I and Phase II cohorts.
STAT1 expression significantly associated with progression free survival
and response to chemotherapy in both Phase I and Phase II validation
studies. Significant positive correlation between STAT1 expression levels
and intratumoral CD8+ T cell density was observed. Intratumoral CD8+ T
cell infiltration did not associate with progression free survival or
response to chemotherapy in both cohorts. Interestingly, the prognostic
relevance of CD8+ T cell was enhanced in combination with STAT1 in both
cohorts. These findings provide evidence that STAT1 as an independent
biomarker and a combination of CD8+ T cell infiltration with STAT1 could
be novel immune-based prognostic and predictive biomarkers in HGSC.
Findings from the current study will aid in patient stratification for
novel immunomodulatory therapies for the management of chemotherapy
resistance in HGSC.

