Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenyl 2-pyridyl ketoxime induces cellular senescence-like
alterations via NO production in human diploid fibroblasts


Phenyl-2-pyridyl ketoxime (PPKO) was found to be one of small molecules
enriched in the extracellular matrix of near-senescent human diploid
fibroblasts (HDFs). Treatment of young HDFs with PPKO reduced the
viability of young HDFs in a dose and time-dependent manner, and resulted
in senescence-associated -galactosidase (SA--gal) staining and G2/M cell
cycle arrest. In addition, the levels of some senescence-associated
proteins, such as phosphorylated ERK1/2, caveolin-1, p53, p16ink4a, and
p21waf1, were elevated in PPKO-treated cells. To monitor the effect of
PPKO on cell stress responses, reactive oxygen species (ROS) production
was examined by flow cytometry. After PPKO treatment, ROS levels
transiently increased at 30 min but then returned to baseline at 60 min.
The levels of some antioxidant enzymes, such as catalase, peroxiredoxin
II, and glutathione peroxidase I, were transiently induced by PPKO
treatment. SOD II levels increased gradually, whereas the SOD I and III
levels were biphasic during the experimental periods after PPKO
treatment. Cellular senescence induced by PPKO was suppressed by chemical
antioxidants, such as N-acetylcysteine, 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxy
and L-buthionine-(S,R)-sulfoximine. Furthermore, PPKO increased nitric
oxide (NO) production via inducible NO synthase (iNOS) in HDFs. In the
presence of NOS inhibitors, such as L-NG-nitroarginine methyl ester and
L-NG-monomethylarginine, PPKO-induced transient NO production and SA--gal
staining were abrogated. Taken together, these results suggest that PPKO
induces cellular senescence in association with transient ROS and NO
production and the subsequent induction of senescence-associated proteins.

