Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the PI3K/Akt pathway during CAR T cell production
results in enhanced efficacy across multiple in vivo tumor models


Patients treated with chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells targeting
CD19 for B cell malignancies have experienced rapid and durable tumor
regressions. Manufacture of CAR T cells for treatment requires ex vivo
culture to facilitate CAR gene transfer and to achieve a therapeutic dose
of the modified cells. Recent data suggests that specific T cell subtypes
can provide enhanced anti-tumor efficacy, spurring efforts to optimize
the production of therapeutic T cells via the cumbersome physical
isolation of central memory T cells or culture in cytokines such as IL-7
and IL-15. Here we explored the potential for a simple culture
modification to improve the therapeutic potential of CAR T cells without
adding manufacturing complexity. To this end, we produced CAR T cells
specific to B cell maturation antigen (BCMA) using standard IL-2 culture
conditions supplemented with a PI3K inhibitor, or with IL-7 and IL-15 in
place of IL-2. The in vivo activity of CAR T cells was studied in mouse
models of human Burkitt's lymphoma (Daudi) and multiple myeloma
(RPMI-8226), both of which express BCMA. In the Daudi model, NSG mice
were injected intravenously with 2 106 tumor cells and allowed to
accumulate a large tumor burden to model late stage disease observed in
relapsed and refractory lymphoma. In this advanced disease model,
anti-BCMA CAR T cells (4 106/mouse) cultured either in IL-2 or IL-7 and
IL-15 had little or no effect on tumor growth (p = 0.22 and 0.23,
respectively) and all mice succumbed to tumors within two weeks of
treatment. In contrast, all animals treated with the same number of
anti-BCMA CAR T cells cultured with PI3K inhibition survived and had
complete long-term tumor regression (p = 0.003). The same anti-BCMA CAR T
cells were studied in a model of multiple myeloma. NSG mice were injected
subcutaneously with 107 RPMI-8226 cells and 22 days later received a
single administration of anti-BCMA CAR T cells (4 105/mouse) cultured
under various conditions. In this model, tumor regression occurred
regardless of in vitro culture conditions. To model tumor relapse and
evaluate CAR T cell durability, surviving animals were re-challenged with
RPMI-8226 cells on the opposite flank two weeks after initial tumor
clearance. In contrast to other conditions, all animals treated with
anti-BCMA CAR T cells cultured with PI3K inhibition were protected
against subsequent tumor challenge (p = 0.005). This improved therapeutic
activity of anti-BCMA CAR T cells cultured with PI3K inhibition was
associated with an increased frequency of CD62L+ CD8+ T cells in the drug
product (p Patients treated with chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells
targeting CD19 for B cell malignancies have experienced rapid and durable
tumor regressions. Manufacture of CAR T cells for treatment requires ex
vivo culture to facilitate CAR gene transfer and to achieve a therapeutic
dose of the modified cells. Recent data suggests that specific T cell
subtypes can provide enhanced anti-tumor efficacy, spurring efforts to
optimize the production of therapeutic T cells via the cumbersome
physical isolation of central memory T cells or culture in cytokines such
as IL-7 and IL-15. Here we explored the potential for a simple culture
modification to improve the therapeutic potential of CAR T cells without
adding manufacturing complexity. To this end, we produced CAR T cells
specific to B cell maturation antigen (BCMA) using standard IL-2 culture
conditions supplemented with a PI3K inhibitor, or with IL-7 and IL-15 in
place of IL-2. The in vivo activity of CAR T cells was studied in mouse
models of human Burkitt's lymphoma (Daudi) and multiple myeloma
(RPMI-8226), both of which express BCMA. In the Daudi model, NSG mice
were injected intravenously with 2 106 tumor cells and allowed to
accumulate a large tumor burden to model late stage disease observed in
relapsed and refractory lymphoma. In this advanced disease model,
anti-BCMA CAR T cells (4 106/mouse) cultured either in IL-2 or IL-7 and
IL-15 had little or no effect on tumor growth (p = 0.22 and 0.23,
respectively) and all mice succumbed to tumors within two weeks of
treatment. In contrast, all animals treated with the same number of
anti-BCMA CAR T cells cultured with PI3K inhibition survived and had
complete long-term tumor regression (p = 0.003). The same anti-BCMA CAR T
cells were studied in a model of multiple myeloma. NSG mice were injected
subcutaneously with 107 RPMI-8226 cells and 22 days later received a
single administration of anti-BCMA CAR T cells (4 105/mouse) cultured
under various conditions. In this model, tumor regression occurred
regardless of in vitro culture conditions. To model tumor relapse and
evaluate CAR T cell durability, surviving animals were re-challenged with
RPMI-8226 cells on the opposite flank two weeks after initial tumor
clearance. In contrast to other conditions, all animals treated with
anti-BCMA CAR T cells cultured with PI3K inhibition were protected
against subsequent tumor challenge (p = 0.005). This improved therapeutic
activity of anti-BCMA CAR T cells cultured with PI3K inhibition was
associated with an increased frequency of CD62L+ CD8+ T cells in the drug
product (p < 0.001) suggesting enrichment of this distinct CD8 T cell
subset. These data suggest that inhibition of PI3K during ex vivo
expansionwith IL-2 may generate an improved anti-BCMA CAR T cell product
for clinical use. Furthermore, this approach could potentially be used in
the manufacture of other T cell therapies.

