Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: M3814, a novel investigational DNA-PK inhibitor: enhancing the
effect of fractionated radiotherapy leading to complete regression of
tumors in mice


Physical or chemical agents that damage DNA such as ionizing radiation
are among the most widely used classes of cancer therapeutics today.
Double strand breaks (DSB) generated in DNA by radiation induce multitude
of cellular responses, including DNA repair, cell cycle arrest or cell
death if the damage is left unrepaired. A complex set of molecular events
are responsible for DNA repair via two major mechanisms - homologous
recombination (HR) or non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). DNA-PKcs with
its regulatory protein subunits, Ku70 and Ku80, is an integral component
of NHEJ and considered an attractive intervention point to inhibit DNA
repair.We have developed an orally bioavailable, highly potent, and
selective inhibitor of DNA-PK, M3814, for cancer therapy in combination
with DNA damaging modalities such as radiation, and radio-chemotherapy.
Here, we present the preclinical characterization of M3814 using
biochemical, cellular and human tumor xenograft models. M3814 sensitized
multiple tumor cell lines to radiation therapy in vitro and strongly
enhanced the antitumor activity of ionizing radiation in vivo with
complete tumor regression applying a clinically relevant fractionated
radiation regimen. These effects are due to inhibition of DNA-PK protein
kinase activity as demonstrated by the levels of DNA-PK
autophosphorylation in human tumor cell lines, and xenograft tumors M3814
is currently investigated in PhI clinical trials.

