Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying candidate genes that regulate tumor cell dormancy


Tumor cells disseminate from the primary tumor site early in the disease
process. These disseminated tumor cells may remain dormant for years and
later become proliferative to cause clinical recurrence and morbidity.
The goal of this study is to better understand the biological and genetic
mechanisms driving this dormant to proliferative switch. We have
developed a 3D culture system using the dormant murine mammary tumor cell
line, D2.0R. D2.0R cells remain dormant when cultured on basement
membrane extract (BME), and exit dormancy when supplemented with
collagen-1 (col-1). We have characterized the gene expression profile of
these cells exiting dormancy in 3D through microarray analysis, and
developed a fourteen-gene dormancy signature by profile cross-referencing
this expression profile to a tumor cell dormancy signature developed by
Kim, R.S. et al (PLOS ONE 2012). We hypothesize that knocking down
expression of genes upregulated in proliferative cells will hinder the
ability of D2.0R cells to break dormancy in 3D culture supplemented with
collagen-1. We have validated three genes by qPCR and are screening these
upregulated genes for biological effects on proliferation by
short-hairpin RNA or molecular inhibition of D2.0R cells in our 3D model.
We conclude that this signature will provide useful insight into genetic
drivers of the dormant to proliferative switch and potential candidates
as therapeutic targets in recurrent disease.

