Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Covalent bonding of a C8-conjugated pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD)
monomer and dimer to a terminal guanine residue of DNA duplex and hairpin
fragments


The pyrrolobenzodiazepines (PBDs) are a family of covalent-binding
DNA-interactive minor-groove binding agents that are of growing interest
due to their potential as stand-alone anticancer agents, and for their
use as payloads in Antibody Drug Conjugates (ADCs). For example, one PBD
Dimer, SJG-136 has reached Phase II evaluation in the clinic for ovarian
and haematological cancers, and a number of PBD-based ADCs are now being
evaluated in pre-clinical, Phase I and II clinical trials (e.g.,
SGN-CD19B, SGN-CD33A [vadastuximab talirine], SGN-CD70A, SGN-CD123A,
SC16LD6.5 [Rova-T, rovalpituzumab tesirine] and ADCT-402).Until now,
PBDs, which bind in the minor groove of DNA and covalently bond to a
guanine residue through its C2-NH2 functional group, were thought to
require a three-base-pair recognition sequence prior to covalent bonding
to the central guanine (with a thermodynamic preference for binding to
5-Pu-G-Pu-3 sequences but a kinetic preference for 5-Py-G-Py-3; Pu =
Purine, Py = Pyrimidine). Using HPLC/MS methodology with designed hairpin
and duplex oligonucleotides, we have now demonstrated that the PBD dimer
SJG-136 and the C8-conjugated PBD Monomer GWL-78 can covalently bond to a
terminal guanine of DNA, with the PBD skeleton spanning only two base
pairs. Control experiments with the non-C8-conjugated anthramycin along
with molecular dynamics simulations suggest that the C8-substituent of a
PBD monomer, or one-half of a PBD Dimer, may provide stability for the
adduct.This observation highlights the importance of PBD C8-substituents,
and also suggests that PBDs may bind to terminal guanines within
stretches of DNA in cells, thus representing a potentially novel
mechanism of action at the end of DNA strand breaks.

