Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intraarterial delivery of doxorubicin-loaded hollow gold
nanospheres for photothermal ablation chemotherapy of hepatocellular
carcinoma in the liver of rats


Purpose: We sought to use combretastatin A-4 phosphate disodium (CA4P) to
enhance the tumor uptake of doxorubicin (Dox)-loaded, polyethylene glycol
(PEG)-coated hollow gold nanospheres (HAuNS; Dox@PEG-HAuNS) for improved
photothermal ablation (PTA)-chemotherapy of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) in rats under image guidance. Materials and Methods: Two groups of
10 HCC-bearing rats each received intrahepatic arterial (IA) injection of
either PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol alone or CA4P followed by PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol 5
min later. Each group was subdivided, and the Au content of tumors and
tissues excised at 1 h or at 24 h was quantified using neutron activation
analysis (n = 5/time point). Five rats received CA4P plus
PEG-[64Cu]-HAuNS/Lipiodol and underwent PET/CT. Therapeutic effects were
compared among 3 groups of 6 rats each that received IA injection of
saline (control group), CA4P plus Dox@PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol (chemotherapy
group), or CA4P plus Dox@PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol plus near-infrared
irradiation (PTA-chemotherapy group). Findings were verified with
postmortem histopathology and/or autoradiography. Results: PEG-HAuNS
uptake in CA4P-pretreated tumors was significantly higher than that in
non-CA4P-pretreated tumors at both 1 h (PPurpose: We sought to use
combretastatin A-4 phosphate disodium (CA4P) to enhance the tumor uptake
of doxorubicin (Dox)-loaded, polyethylene glycol (PEG)-coated hollow gold
nanospheres (HAuNS; Dox@PEG-HAuNS) for improved photothermal ablation
(PTA)-chemotherapy of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in rats under image
guidance. Materials and Methods: Two groups of 10 HCC-bearing rats each
received intrahepatic arterial (IA) injection of either
PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol alone or CA4P followed by PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol 5 min
later. Each group was subdivided, and the Au content of tumors and
tissues excised at 1 h or at 24 h was quantified using neutron activation
analysis (n = 5/time point). Five rats received CA4P plus
PEG-[64Cu]-HAuNS/Lipiodol and underwent PET/CT. Therapeutic effects were
compared among 3 groups of 6 rats each that received IA injection of
saline (control group), CA4P plus Dox@PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol (chemotherapy
group), or CA4P plus Dox@PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol plus near-infrared
irradiation (PTA-chemotherapy group). Findings were verified with
postmortem histopathology and/or autoradiography. Results: PEG-HAuNS
uptake in CA4P-pretreated tumors was significantly higher than that in
non-CA4P-pretreated tumors at both 1 h (P<0.05) and 24 h (PPurpose: We
sought to use combretastatin A-4 phosphate disodium (CA4P) to enhance the
tumor uptake of doxorubicin (Dox)-loaded, polyethylene glycol
(PEG)-coated hollow gold nanospheres (HAuNS; Dox@PEG-HAuNS) for improved
photothermal ablation (PTA)-chemotherapy of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) in rats under image guidance. Materials and Methods: Two groups of
10 HCC-bearing rats each received intrahepatic arterial (IA) injection of
either PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol alone or CA4P followed by PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol 5
min later. Each group was subdivided, and the Au content of tumors and
tissues excised at 1 h or at 24 h was quantified using neutron activation
analysis (n = 5/time point). Five rats received CA4P plus
PEG-[64Cu]-HAuNS/Lipiodol and underwent PET/CT. Therapeutic effects were
compared among 3 groups of 6 rats each that received IA injection of
saline (control group), CA4P plus Dox@PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol (chemotherapy
group), or CA4P plus Dox@PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol plus near-infrared
irradiation (PTA-chemotherapy group). Findings were verified with
postmortem histopathology and/or autoradiography. Results: PEG-HAuNS
uptake in CA4P-pretreated tumors was significantly higher than that in
non-CA4P-pretreated tumors at both 1 h (P<0.05) and 24 h (P<0.01). The
tumor-to-liver PEG-HAuNS uptake ratios at 1 h and 24 h were 5.633.09 and
1.680.77, respectively, in the CA4P-treated group and 1.292.40 and
0.140.11, respectively, in the non-CA4P-treated group. PET/CT clearly
delineated the tumors, enabling quantitative imaging guidance. Tumor
volumes 10 d after therapy were 1.681.01, 3.961.75, and 6.132.27 cm3 in
the PTA-chemotherapy, chemotherapy, and control groups, respectively,
with significant differences between the PTA-chemotherapy group and other
groups (PPurpose: We sought to use combretastatin A-4 phosphate disodium
(CA4P) to enhance the tumor uptake of doxorubicin (Dox)-loaded,
polyethylene glycol (PEG)-coated hollow gold nanospheres (HAuNS;
Dox@PEG-HAuNS) for improved photothermal ablation (PTA)-chemotherapy of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in rats under image guidance. Materials
and Methods: Two groups of 10 HCC-bearing rats each received intrahepatic
arterial (IA) injection of either PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol alone or CA4P
followed by PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol 5 min later. Each group was subdivided,
and the Au content of tumors and tissues excised at 1 h or at 24 h was
quantified using neutron activation analysis (n = 5/time point). Five
rats received CA4P plus PEG-[64Cu]-HAuNS/Lipiodol and underwent PET/CT.
Therapeutic effects were compared among 3 groups of 6 rats each that
received IA injection of saline (control group), CA4P plus
Dox@PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol (chemotherapy group), or CA4P plus
Dox@PEG-HAuNS/Lipiodol plus near-infrared irradiation (PTA-chemotherapy
group). Findings were verified with postmortem histopathology and/or
autoradiography. Results: PEG-HAuNS uptake in CA4P-pretreated tumors was
significantly higher than that in non-CA4P-pretreated tumors at both 1 h
(P<0.05) and 24 h (P<0.01). The tumor-to-liver PEG-HAuNS uptake ratios at
1 h and 24 h were 5.633.09 and 1.680.77, respectively, in the
CA4P-treated group and 1.292.40 and 0.140.11, respectively, in the
non-CA4P-treated group. PET/CT clearly delineated the tumors, enabling
quantitative imaging guidance. Tumor volumes 10 d after therapy were
1.681.01, 3.961.75, and 6.132.27 cm3 in the PTA-chemotherapy,
chemotherapy, and control groups, respectively, with significant
differences between the PTA-chemotherapy group and other groups (P<0.05).
Conclusion: CA4P pretreatment causes a higher concentration of
Dox@PEG-HAuNS to be trapped inside the tumor, thereby enhancing the
anti-HCC efficacy of PET/CT-guided PTA-chemotherapy in rats. (Supported
in part by the John S. Dunn Foundation)

