Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of the first cell-active inhibitors of poly(ADP Ribose)
glycohydrolase through high-throughput screening and computational
approaches


DNA repair is a critical process for the survival and normal
proliferation of healthy cells. However, given the enhanced levels of
cellular stress and genomic instability, these repair processes are even
more critical to the survival of malignant cells, where rates of DNA
damage are considerably increased. Given this, inhibitors of DNA damage
repair have seen a resurgence of interest in recent years in an effort to
exploit tumour cell vulnerabilities. One such example of this approach
has resulted in the recent approval of the PARP inhibitor olaparib
(Lynparza) for women with advanced ovarian cancer associated with
defective BRCA genes.Olaparib acts against the poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase
(PARP) enzymes, more recently re-defined as the ARTD (Diphtheria
toxin-like human ADP-ribosyltransferase) enzyme class. Whilst PARP is
widely known to play critical and well-understood roles in DNA repair,
poly(ADP ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG) is less well known but equally
essential for effective DNA repair, degrading PAR chains and facilitating
effective DNA repair. However, its inhibition may offer several key
advantages over PARP inhibition. Most critically, whilst there are 18
isoforms, there exists only a single PARG protein, offering a specific
point of therapeutic intervention. However, due to the open nature of the
PARG binding cleft and the nature of the binding site, this protein has
been considered to be difficult to inhibit with small, drug-like small
molecules, particularly in the cellular context.This poster will describe
our efforts to overcome these challenges against this challenging target
and report our early successes achieved through innovative computational
chemistry strategies. These efforts have delivered several credible,
drug-like startpoints for further medicinal chemistry optimisation.

