Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mammography decision-making: Trends, predictors and effects of
provider communication in the Health Information National Trends Survey
2011-2015


Introduction: In 2009 the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
recommended against routine annual mammograms among women aged 40-49.
However, mammography utilization appears unchanged since that time. We
examined whether women, particularly those ages 40-49, are having
discussions about mammography with their healthcare providers and how
this affects screening behavior.Methods: Data were drawn from the
2011-2014 Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS). We included
female respondents age 40 or older with no personal history of breast
cancer who reported a medical visit in the previous two years, and
responded to the following question: Has a doctor or other health
professional ever told you that you could choose whether or not to have a
mammogram? (N = 5085). We examined trends in the proportion of women
reporting provider communication on mammogram choice according to 10-year
age group. We used logistic regression to generate odds ratios (OR) and
95% confidence intervals (CI) for predictors of provider communication
and also assessed whether provider communication was associated with
mammography screening in the previous two years.Results: Less than half
of the women reported provider communication on mammogram choice in each
year (2011:44.3%; 2012: 37.5%; 2013: 37.0%; 2014: 43.6%). In every year
except 2014, women age 40-49 were most likely to report provider
communication, though this difference was only significant in 2013 (45%
vs. 30.2-36.6%; p = 0.02). In multivariable-adjusted models, women age
40-49 were 27% more likely to report provider communication on mammogram
choice (OR: 1.27, 95% CI: 1.02-1.59) compared to women age 50-59.
Non-Hispanic black women were 33% less likely to report such
communication (OR: 0.67, 95% CI: 0.52-0.88) compared to non-Hispanic
Whites. The youngest (40-49 years) and oldest (70 years) women were most
likely to report no mammogram in the previous two years. Women who
reported provider communication on mammogram choice were 17% more likely
to report no mammogram in the past two years (OR: 1.17, 95% CI:
0.93-1.46), though this was not statistically significant. When
stratified by 10-year age group, provider communication was only
associated with higher risk of no mammogram among women age 70 and older
(OR: 1.93, 95% CI: 1.29-2.89).Conclusions: Between 2011-2014 women age
40-49 were the most likely to receive healthcare provider communication
on mammogram choice. Still, the majority of women in that age group did
not receive such communication despite the 2009 USPSTF recommendation
that the decision to start screening mammography prior to age 50 should
be an individualized one that takes into account patient values regarding
specific benefits and harms. Provider communication on mammogram choice
can influence screening behavior, particularly for older women.

