Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3 modulates HOTAIR transcription to influence HNSCC growth in
vitro and in vivo


BackgroundSquamous cell carcinoma is the most common cancer type of head
and neck (HNSCC) with poor prognosis. Signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) activation is involved in HNSCC carcinogenesis as
a transcript factor. A new class of transcripts, long noncoding RNAs
(lncRNAs), has been recently found to be pervasively transcribed in the
genome. HOTAIR, lncRNA Hox transcript antisense intergenic RNA, has been
characterized as a novel hall marker to predict poor prognosis in HNSCC.
HOTAIR regulates downstream target gene transcription by recruiting
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) to the cell nucleus and triggers
triple methylation of H3K27.MethodsRNA sequencing, qPCR and CHIP assay
were used to determine HOTAIR is a down-stream gene of STAT3. MTT and
western blot were employed to examine the regulatory mechanism between
STAT3 and HOTAIR in HNSCC cancers in vitro. Additionally, a cell derived
xenograft tumor model was used to further validate the anti tumor effect
of targeting STAT3/HOTAIR axis in vivo.ResultsSTAT3 depleted HNSCC cell
showed decreased HOTAIR expression by qPCR assay. CHIP assay indicated
STAT3 bind to the promoter region of HOTAIR encoding gene. Combined
inhibition of STAT3 and HOTAIR significantly inhibited cell
proliferation, sensitive to cisplatin in HNSCC. Up-regulating HOTAIR
partially compensated anti-tumor effect of targeting STAT3 in
HNSCC.ConclusionOur data suggested that HOTAIR overexpression is depended
on constitutive STAT3 activation in HNSCC and targeting STAT3/HOTAIR axis
showed significant therapeutic potential in vitro and in vivo.

