Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined efficacy of trifluridine and SN-38 in a 5-FU-resistant
human colorectal cancer cell line


Background: In 2015, the FDA approved TAS-102 (also named TFTD)a 1:0.5
molar ratio of trifluridine (FTD), an antitumor agent, and tipiracil
(TPI), a thymidine phosphorylase inhibitorfor the treatment of refractory
metastatic colorectal cancer. In this study, we investigated whether
cytotoxicity was enhanced when FTD was used simultaneously or
sequentially with SN-38, which is an active metabolite of irinotecan
hydrochloride (CPT-11). Method: The colorectal cancer cell line DLD-1 and
5-FU-resistant DLD-1/5-FU were treated with one of four combinations of
SN-38 and FTD: (1) exposure to only 0.1-2.0 M FTD or only 0.0005-0.02 M
SN-38 for 24 hours; (2) simultaneous exposure to 0.1-2.0 M FTD and 0.01 M
SN-38 for 24 hours, followed by no drug exposure for 24 hours; (3)
sequential exposure to 0.1-2.0 M FTD for 24 hours followed by 0.01 M
SN-38 for 24 hours; or (4) sequential exposure to 0.01 M SN-38 for 24
hours followed by 0.1-2.0 M FTD for 24 hours. All treatments were
evaluated by the colony formation assay. Results: The 5-FU-resistant
DLD-1/5-FU demonstrated no cross-resistance to both FTD and SN-38.
Survival fractions (SFs) of DLD-1 and DLD-1/5-FU after simultaneous
exposure to 0.5 M FTD and 0.01 M SN-38 were 0.30 and 0.26, respectively,
which were lower compared to those after exposure to FTD alone (0.92 and
0.94, respectively). After sequential exposure to 0.5 M FTD followed by
0.01 M SN-38 or vice versa, SFs of DLD-1 were 0.49 and 0.36,
respectively, and those of DLD-1/5-FU were 0.47 and 0.22, respectively;
in both cases, SFs were lower than those after exposure to FTD alone
(0.92 and 0.94, respectively). Taken together, sequential exposure to
SN-38 followed by FTD was more effective in both cell lines. Conclusion:
Simultaneous and sequential exposure to FTD and SN-38 were effective
against both parent and 5-FU-resistant cell lines. These results suggest
that a combination of TAS-102 and CPT-11 might be useful to relapsed
colorectal cancer after 5-FU-based treatment.


