Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of PKC- protein and mRNA levels in normal and malignant
breast tissue


It is estimated that in 2015 breast cancer will be the second leading
cause of cancer death in women. For this purpose, biochemical markers for
breast cancer have been investigated, to assist in early detection and
more accurate diagnoses. In breast cancer tissue, the atypical isozyme of
protein kinase C zeta, PKC-, has been a topic in research; It has been
shown that an overexpression of this protein may be indicative of
developing carcinogenesis and contributes to proliferation through the NF
kappa B pathway, which is a stress-regulated switch for cell survival. In
this investigation, the expression of PKC- was analyzed in normal and
malignant female human breast tissue samples by Western blot,
immunoprecipitation and PCR. In the preliminary results, the malignant
breast tissue samples illustrated a significant expression of PKC when
compared to the expression of PKC- in normal breast tissue samples. The
same tissues were also processed for total RNA isolation which was
followed by cDNA synthesis and Real Time PCR. The level of PKC- mRNA was
tested and no overexpression was observed in either malignant or normal
breast tissue samples. While protein studies may suggest that PKC- could
be considered a biomarker for breast cancer, the same cannot be said
about mRNA levels. The overexpression of PKC- protein level and the
normal PKC- mRNA level are indicators of possible miRNA activity that may
regulate translation in malignant tissues but not the normal.

