Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating an oncogenic role of an extracellular matrix protein,
Agrin, in hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most fatal cancers
worldwide. Despite offering poor survival advantage, broad spectrum
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors are the sole chemotherapeutic
treatments for advanced stages of HCC. Hence, there is a pressing
clinical need to broaden the scope of HCC treatments through the
systematic identification of suitable candidate(s) overexpressed in liver
cancer. Therefore, we performed a SILAC based quantitative proteomics of
cell surface proteins in HCC lines and identified proteoglycan Agrin to
be overexpressed and secreted in HCC. Our systematic cell biological
analysis indicated a role of Agrin in maintaining focal adhesion
integrity through stimulation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK). We showed
that Agrin functions in cellular migration, invasion and tumor growth.
However, the exact mechanisms by which Agrin's mediates liver
tumorigenesis remain unknown. The present study dissects how Agrin
mediated signals from the extracellular matrix are sensed by tumor cells.
Our evidences reveal that Agrin binds to its co-receptor(s) Lrp4 and
subsequently activates MuSK to mediate oncogenic effects through
activating focal adhesions. Additionally, integrins and focal adhesions
collaborate closely with Agrin in communicating ECM signals to
intracellular components in multiple HCC cell lines, thereby stimulating
their invasive, migratory and growth capabilities. More importantly,
Lrp4-MuSK as well as integrin-FAK pathways are crucial downstream
signaling axes of Agrin's functions in liver tumorigenesis. The signal
transduction network initiated by Agrin activates the oncogenic program
in liver by negatively regulating tumor suppressor pathways. These novel
insights will have profound impact on the possibility of targeting Agrin
mediated oncogenesis in HCC.

