Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A distinct AMP-activated protein kinase phosphorylation site is
associated with metastasis and castration-resistance in prostate cancer


AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a critical regulator of cellular
metabolism and plays important role in the development and progression of
several human diseases including cancer. We have previously shown that
AMPK activity is significantly inhibited by Ser-485/491 phosphorylation
in cell culture and in vivo models of metastatic and castration-resistant
prostate cancer. To determine potential translatability, we investigated
AMPK-Ser-485/491 phosphorylation status in clinical prostate cancer
specimens and its correlation with metastasis and progression to
castration-resistance. Metastasis and matched primary tumor specimens
from 45 metastatic prostate cancer patients, 31.1% of which were
post-androgen deprivation therapy failure (castration-resistant prostate
cancer), and primary tumor specimens from 30 non-metastatic,
hormone-dependent prostate cancer patients with undetectable PSA for a
mean of 97.1 17.5 months were obtained from the University Hospitals Case
Medical Center Pathology Archive. Slides were cut from paraffin blocks,
immunostained for p-Ser-485/491 AMPK and total AMPK, analyzed by a
pathologist, and statistical significance determined by T-test,
Kruskal-Wallis test, Fisher's exact test, or Chi-Square test. Mean
pre-diagnostic biopsy PSA was 6.5 ng/mL (range 1.20-25.3 ng/mL) in
non-metastatic patients and 501.9 ng/mL (range 1.82-3200 ng/mL) in
metastatic patients (p AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a critical
regulator of cellular metabolism and plays important role in the
development and progression of several human diseases including cancer.
We have previously shown that AMPK activity is significantly inhibited by
Ser-485/491 phosphorylation in cell culture and in vivo models of
metastatic and castration-resistant prostate cancer. To determine
potential translatability, we investigated AMPK-Ser-485/491
phosphorylation status in clinical prostate cancer specimens and its
correlation with metastasis and progression to castration-resistance.
Metastasis and matched primary tumor specimens from 45 metastatic
prostate cancer patients, 31.1% of which were post-androgen deprivation
therapy failure (castration-resistant prostate cancer), and primary tumor
specimens from 30 non-metastatic, hormone-dependent prostate cancer
patients with undetectable PSA for a mean of 97.1 17.5 months were
obtained from the University Hospitals Case Medical Center Pathology
Archive. Slides were cut from paraffin blocks, immunostained for
p-Ser-485/491 AMPK and total AMPK, analyzed by a pathologist, and
statistical significance determined by T-test, Kruskal-Wallis test,
Fisher's exact test, or Chi-Square test. Mean pre-diagnostic biopsy PSA
was 6.5 ng/mL (range 1.20-25.3 ng/mL) in non-metastatic patients and
501.9 ng/mL (range 1.82-3200 ng/mL) in metastatic patients (p < 0.0001).
Mean total Gleason score of primary tumors was 6.5 in the non-metastatic
group and 8.2 in the metastatic group (p AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) is a critical regulator of cellular metabolism and plays important
role in the development and progression of several human diseases
including cancer. We have previously shown that AMPK activity is
significantly inhibited by Ser-485/491 phosphorylation in cell culture
and in vivo models of metastatic and castration-resistant prostate
cancer. To determine potential translatability, we investigated
AMPK-Ser-485/491 phosphorylation status in clinical prostate cancer
specimens and its correlation with metastasis and progression to
castration-resistance. Metastasis and matched primary tumor specimens
from 45 metastatic prostate cancer patients, 31.1% of which were
post-androgen deprivation therapy failure (castration-resistant prostate
cancer), and primary tumor specimens from 30 non-metastatic,
hormone-dependent prostate cancer patients with undetectable PSA for a
mean of 97.1 17.5 months were obtained from the University Hospitals Case
Medical Center Pathology Archive. Slides were cut from paraffin blocks,
immunostained for p-Ser-485/491 AMPK and total AMPK, analyzed by a
pathologist, and statistical significance determined by T-test,
Kruskal-Wallis test, Fisher's exact test, or Chi-Square test. Mean
pre-diagnostic biopsy PSA was 6.5 ng/mL (range 1.20-25.3 ng/mL) in
non-metastatic patients and 501.9 ng/mL (range 1.82-3200 ng/mL) in
metastatic patients (p < 0.0001). Mean total Gleason score of primary
tumors was 6.5 in the non-metastatic group and 8.2 in the metastatic
group (p < 0.0001); primary prostate tumor volume (mean S.D.) was 22.1
19.5% in the non-metastatic group and 68.1 28.7% in the metastatic group
(p AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a critical regulator of
cellular metabolism and plays important role in the development and
progression of several human diseases including cancer. We have
previously shown that AMPK activity is significantly inhibited by
Ser-485/491 phosphorylation in cell culture and in vivo models of
metastatic and castration-resistant prostate cancer. To determine
potential translatability, we investigated AMPK-Ser-485/491
phosphorylation status in clinical prostate cancer specimens and its
correlation with metastasis and progression to castration-resistance.
Metastasis and matched primary tumor specimens from 45 metastatic
prostate cancer patients, 31.1% of which were post-androgen deprivation
therapy failure (castration-resistant prostate cancer), and primary tumor
specimens from 30 non-metastatic, hormone-dependent prostate cancer
patients with undetectable PSA for a mean of 97.1 17.5 months were
obtained from the University Hospitals Case Medical Center Pathology
Archive. Slides were cut from paraffin blocks, immunostained for
p-Ser-485/491 AMPK and total AMPK, analyzed by a pathologist, and
statistical significance determined by T-test, Kruskal-Wallis test,
Fisher's exact test, or Chi-Square test. Mean pre-diagnostic biopsy PSA
was 6.5 ng/mL (range 1.20-25.3 ng/mL) in non-metastatic patients and
501.9 ng/mL (range 1.82-3200 ng/mL) in metastatic patients (p < 0.0001).
Mean total Gleason score of primary tumors was 6.5 in the non-metastatic
group and 8.2 in the metastatic group (p < 0.0001); primary prostate
tumor volume (mean S.D.) was 22.1 19.5% in the non-metastatic group and
68.1 28.7% in the metastatic group (p < 0.0001). The intensity of overall
p-Ser-485/491 AMPK staining and the number of p-Ser-485/491 AMPK
positively-stained cells was significantly increased in primary prostate
tumors (p = 0.0003 and p = 0.0008, respectively) and metastases (p =
0.0011 and p = 0.0062, respectively) of metastatic prostate cancer
patients when compared to staining of primary tumor specimens from
non-metastatic prostate cancer patients. Further, the intensity of
overall p-Ser-485/491 AMPK staining increased 2.21-fold (p = 0.0050) and
the number of p-Ser-485/491 AMPK positively-stained cells increased
1.77-fold (p = 0.0041) in castration-resistant metastatic prostate cancer
specimens compared to androgen-dependent prostate cancer specimens.
Therefore, AMPK Ser-485/491 phosphorylation is associated with metastasis
and castration-resistance in clinical prostate cancer and may be a novel
target for treatment.

