Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer cell lines with acquired resistance to selective ER
degraders (SERDs) are dependent on PI3K signaling


Estrogen positive (ER+) breast cancer accounts for the majority of all
breast cancers and is primarily treated with endocrine therapy. However,
even though current endocrine treatments are effective, a subset of
patients inevitably become resistant to these treatments. The novel oral
SERD, GDC-0810/ARN-810, is currently in Phase II clinical trials in ER+
breast cancer patients. GDC-0810 induces ER degradation in ER+ MCF7 and
T47D cells and inhibits cell proliferation. Moreover, it is also
efficacious in ER+ tumor models in vivo, including in MCF7-ESR1 Y537S
xenografts and in WHIM20 ESR1 mutant Y537S PDX tumors. Given that little
is known about resistance mechanisms to SERDs, our aim was to understand
what mechanisms may underlie resistance after continuous exposure.We
generated cell lines resistant to GDC-0810 and show that all of these
lines were also cross-resistant to fulvestrant and tamoxifen. We
determined that cells with acquired-resistance were more sensitive than
parental cells to inhibitors of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.
Additionally, in some resistant clones, ER protein expression was lost,
but this loss was transient and could be regained after long-term growth
in the absence of SERDs. A range of approaches are being undertaken to
explore the underlying mechanisms driving acquired-resistance to SERDs.
These preclinical studies may inform future clinical combinations.

