Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Negative regulation of the CCL22/CCR4 axis by TNFR1 improves
melanoma outcome


Purpose: Immunotherapy for melanoma skin cancer is mainly focused on
preventing T cell deactivation through PD1 or CTLA4 inhibition. Another
proposed mechanism to increase global T cell response is to prevent Treg
immunossupressive function through TNFR1/TNF activation or CCR4/CCL22
inhibition. We aimed to evaluate the role of TNFR1 and CCR4 in an
experimental model of melanoma.Experimental procedures: C57/Bl6 WT, TNFR1
-/- or CCR4 -/- mice were subcutaneously inoculated with 30,000 B16-F10
cells for tumor growth measurement and survival analysis. In a different
set of experiments, mice were euthanized fourteen days after inoculation
(D14) for spleen, lymph nodes and tumor harvesting for Treg
(CD4+CD25+FoxP3+) and TAM (CD45+F4/80+CD206+) quantification by flow
cytometry. CCL22 concentrations were quantified in conditioned media from
bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDM) from WT, or TNFR1 -/- mice.
Furthermore, TNFR1 and CCR4 gene expression in human melanoma was
determined by data mining in deposited datasets (GSE46517).Results:
TNFR1-/- showed increased tumor volumes and reduced survival when
compared to their WT counterparts. At D14, we detected increased Treg and
TAM accumulation in TNFR1-/- tumor microenvironment. CCL22 concentrations
were increased in conditioned media from M2-polarized BMDM from TNFR1-/-
mice. CCR4 deficient mice presented reduced tumor volumes and increased
survival, accompanied by a reduced Treg accumulation at D14. Data mining
in GEO gene expression bank revealed that metastatic melanoma presented
reduced TNFR1 and increased CCR4 expression.Conclusions: CCR4 inhibition
is a potential strategy to reduce Treg accumulation and improve outcomes
in cancer patients. Further assessments are required to demonstrate the
role of TNFR1 pathway in CCR4 activation.

