Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo antitumor activity of TH3424: Preclinical
rationale for a highly selective AKR1C3 prodrug for treating
hepatocellular carcinomas


Aldo-keto reductase family 1 member C3 (AKR1C3) catalyzes the reduction
of a diverse group of substrates, including prostaglandin (PG) D2 and
PGH2. It has been reported that AKR1C3 is overexpressed in the majority
of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) with 58% of HCC patient surgical tumor
samples having strong expression of the enzyme1. Tumors overexpressing
AKR1C3 can be resistant to radiation therapy2 and chemotherapies3. AKR1C3
is also expressed in normal tissues,but its expression is much lower than
in HCC tissue1.HCC is the sixth most common cause of cancer. It has very
poor prognosis, and is the second leading cause of cancer death in all
cancers. Treatment options for late stage liver cancer are very limited,
with Sorafenib, a multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitor, being the only
approved drug with limited efficacy. More effective therapies are
urgently needed.TH3424 is a prodrug which selectively releases a DNA
alkylating agent upon exposure to activated AKR1C3. In vitro cell
proliferation tests with TH3424 in several HCC cell lines showed that it
is very potent (IC50 10nM with 2 hour exposure) in killing cancer cells
with high levels of AKR1C3, but less active (IC50 10 M) in killing cells
with low or noAKR1C3 reductase. The activity of TH3424 correlates with
the expression level of AKR1C3 as the potency of TH3424 is inhibited when
used with a specific AKR1C3 inhibitor:4 (IC50: 4 nM vs 6.3 M with
SN33638) in a non-small cell lung cancer cell line (H460). In vivo
orthotopic and patient derived disease (PDX) liver cancer model studies
have shown promising efficacy with TH3424 being administer weekly with
doses as low as 1.5mg/kg. TH3424 showed better efficacy than Sorafenib in
an orthotopic HepG2 mouse model. Three of 8 mice treated with TH3424 at
2.5 mg/kg, Q7Dx3, and 8 of 8 mice treated with TH3424 at 5 mg/kg, Q7Dx3
were tumor free at day 35.Reference:1: Guise C. P.; Abbattista M. R.;
Singleton R. S.; Holford S. D.; Connolly J.; Dachs G. U.; Fox S. B.;
Rollock R.; Harvey J.; Guiford P.; Daate F.; Wilson W. R.; and Patterson
A. V.; Cancer Res.70(4), 2010, 15732: Xiong W.; Zhao J.; Yu H.; Li X.;
Sun S.; Li Y.; Xia Q.; Zhang C.; He Q.; Gao X.; Zhang L.; Zhou D.; Plos
One, V. 9 (11), 2014, e1119113: Liu C.; Lou W.; Zhu Y.; Yang J.;
Nadiminty N.; Gaikwad N.; Evans C.; Gao A.; Cancer Res.; 2015, 75(7),
14134: Flanagan J. U.; Atwell G. J.; Heinrich D. M.; Brooke D. G.; Silva
S.; Rigoreau L. J. M.; Trivier E.; Turnbull A. P.; Raynham T.; Jamieson
S. M. F.; Denny W. A.; Bioorg. Med. Chem.; 22(2014); 967

