Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted antifolates with thienoyl regioisomers in the side chain
result in improved selectivity and potency against KB human tumor cells


Folates function as cofactors in one-carbon transfer reactions including
de novo biosynthesis of nucleotides and play a key in DNA and RNA
synthesis, epigenetic processes, cellular proliferation and survival.
Cellular folate uptake is mediated by three distinct transporters. Among
these, the reduced folate carrier (RFC) is the predominant folate
transporter and is critical for antitumor efficacy of currently used
classical antifolates such as methotrexate (MTX), pemetrexed (PMX), and
raltitrexed (RTX). RFC is ubiquitously expressed in tumor cells and in
normal tissues, resulting in dose-limiting toxicity with classical
antifolates. We previously reported a series of 6-substituted
pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine antifolates that are selectively transported by
folate receptors (FR) and/or by the proton-coupled folate transporter
(PCFT) over RFC and inhibit FR/PCFT-expressing human tumor cells (KB and
IGROV1) at sub-nanomolar IC50 values. These antifolates are comparatively
more potent and reduce the toxicity of clinically available antifolates
which have non-selective uptake. As an extension of the SAR, we focused
on a novel isosteric series of 6-substituted thieno[2,3-d]pyrimidine
analogs, with a 3- or 4- carbon bridge between the
thieno[2,3-d]pyrimidine and the thienoyl regioisomeric side chain. This
simple isosteric replacement of pyrrole with thiophene in the scaffold,
combined with varying the positions of attachment of 3- and 4-carbon
bridge and the L-glutamic acid on the thiophene ring, provides compounds
with different chain length, conformations and extra hydrogen bond donors
and/or acceptors compared to the previously reported compounds. All the
analogs (AGF 102, AGF131, AGF 271, AGF 275, AGF 276 and AGF 282) are
potently inhibitory toward Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells (RT16)
expressing human FR (IC50s of 3.1, 0.33, 0.45, 1.1, 0.83 and 5.6 nM,
respectively). All the analogs were inactive in the CHO cell line
expressing RFC indicating absolute selectivity for FR. AGF271, AGF275,
and AGF282 showed modest (IC50s from 95-460 nM) with PCFT-expressing CHO
cells (R2/PCFT4). AGF102, AGF 131 and AGF 271 AGF 275 AGF 276 AGF 282
were all potently inhibitory toward KB tumor cells (IC50 of 2.10, 1.70,
1.48, 1.81, 5.74 and 7.61nM, respectively). Collectively, our results
suggest that AGF102, AGF 131, AGF 271, AGF 275, AGF 276 and AGF 282 are
targeted antifolates with activity profiles that suggest that further
preclinical studies and optimization are warranted.

