Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneous response to platinum in metastatic ovarian cancer
detectable by biodynamic imaging


The mechanisms by which tumors develop multi-drug resistance are not well
understood. Biodynamic imaging (BDI) is a label-free assay that detects
phenotypic response of ex vivo tissue to chemotherapeutic drugs. In the
current study, we used BDI to measure the response of primary and
metastatic ovarian tumors to cisplatin. Xenografts from two human ovarian
cancer cell lines, A2780 and SKOV3, were grown orthotopically in the
ovaries of nude mice and allowed to metastasize in the peritoneal space.
Primary and metastatic tumors were harvested and tested for response to
25 M cisplatin by using BDI. Sensitivity was assessed through selected
response biomarkers. Metastatic tumors of the platinum-sensitive A2780
cell line showed 20% decrease in sensitivity to cisplatin compared with
the response of the primary tumors, while the less sensitive SKOV3 tumors
exhibited a 6% decrease in response of metastatic vs. primary tumors. In
parallel, RNA sequencing profiled primary ovarian and metastatic
implants. Differential gene expression was detected in primary tumors vs.
metastatic sites. Genes upregulated in metastases include TIMP3, WNT2,
OSR1, elastin (SKOV3 tumor model) and MMP1, MMP3, MMP10, MET, EGFR,
PDGF-C (A2780 tumor model). The study demonstrates the ability of BDI to
detect differences in drug sensitivity between primary and metastatic
tumors and provides support for the association of metastasis and
chemoresistance in ovarian cancer. Supported by NIH R01 EB016582.

