Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 basal tumors have frequent mutation of HER3 and are more
resistant to HER2-targeted therapy


Background: HER2 tumors are heterogeneous at both the clinical and
molecular levels (Harris et al 2007, Varadan, AACR 2015). We and others
have identified a distinct molecular subtype termed HER2 basal that
demonstrates lower response to preoperative trastuzumab and is
characterized by overexpression of the basal-like signature genes
(Harris, CCR 2007; Carey, JCO 2015). We sought to better understand the
molecular underpinnings of the HER2 basal phenotype by performing whole
exome sequencing (WES) in a cohort of HER2 tumors treated with
trastuzumab-containing preoperative therapy.Methods: A multicenter trial
(BrUOG 211B) was conducted to determine predictors of pathologic complete
response (pCR) to trastuzumab (T)-containing preoperative therapy. Sixty
HER2+ Stage II-III patients were enrolled and assigned to either a single
dose of T or nab-paclitaxel (N) followed by T+N+carboplatin (TNC). Fresh
tumor core biopsies were taken at baseline and 2 weeks after the initial
dose of T or N. PAM50 subtyping was performed using gene expression data
from patient tumor biopsies and tumors were classified into
HER2-Enriched, HER2-Luminal and HER2-Basal subtypes based on ER/PR IHC
values and relative expression of the proliferation-associated genes
within the PAM50 gene list. WES was performed on a total of 86 samples
(49 baseline and 37 from the post brief-exposure timepoint), with each
sample sequenced at an average depth of 90X. Somatic mutations (single
nucleotide variants and short indels) were assessed using Genome Analysis
Toolkit (GATK) UnifiedGenotyper followed by a robust pipeline comparing
multiple databases to eliminate germline variants. Copy-number estimation
was performed on the WES data using a novel algorithm, ENVE (Varadan,
Genome Med, 2015) that robustly identifies somatic copy-number
alterations.Results: WES profiles of HER2 basal tumors (n = 6) revealed
lower average copy number for HER2 (2.5 vs 5.8) and were less likely to
have high-level amplification (>4 copies per cell) of other amplicons
(e.g. 11q13, 20q13) with the exception of 8q24. The so-called Myc
amplicon was co-amplified in all subtypes relatively equally (3/6 in
HER2-B, 11/19 in HER2-E, 10/23 in HER2-L). HER2-B tumors were also
characterized by higher frequency of mutations in Rb (2/6 versus 1/42; P
= 0.0376) and HER3 (4/6 vs 2/42; P = 0.0011) compared with other subtypes
and frequent alteration of p53 (4/6 versus 17/42; P = 0.22). pCR to preop
TNC was HER2-B 3/8, HER2-E 10/20, HER2-L 6/21, not significant in this
small cohort. The presence of HER3 mutations suggests a potential
mechanism for the previously reported poor clinical response to
preoperative anti-HER2 therapy in HER2 basal tumors.Conclusions: The HER2
basal subtype is more likely to exhibit mutations in HER3 and is less
likely to respond to trastuzumab-based therapy. Larger cohorts are
required to confirm these findings and trials of other HER2 targeted
agents in this subtype should be considered.

