Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Light exposure at night influences host/cancer circadian
regulatory dynamics, Warburg effect, and human prostate cancer
progression in nude rats


Current evidence indicates that rotating night shift workers have an
increased risk of developing breast and prostate cancers, which have been
associated with light at night (LAN)-induced circadian disruption as the
principal risk factor. Previously, we demonstrated that animal room dark
phase light contamination with as little as 0.20 lux (0.08 W/cm2)
suppressed the nocturnal production of the circadian oncostatic
neurohormone melatonin and stimulated human breast tumor growth and
metabolism. The circadian melatonin signal suppresses tumor growth and
metabolism via an MT1 melatonin receptor-mediated signaling mechanism
involving inhibition of aerobic glycolysis (Warburg effect) and linoleic
acid (LA) uptake and conversion to the mitogen 13-hydroxyoctadecadienoic
acid (13-HODE) culminating in down-regulation of the epidermal growth
factor and insulin-like growth factor-1 pathways. We developed a new
tissue-isolated androgen-receptor positive (AR+), castration-sensitive
VCaP prostate tumor model in adult male athymic nude rats
(Crl:NIH-Foxn1rnu), to test the hypothesis that nocturnal melatonin
levels inhibit, while dim LAN (dLAN)-induced suppression of nocturnal
melatonin production stimulates, tumor signaling, metabolic and growth
activity. VCaP xenograft-bearing rats (n = 6/group) maintained on either
a control light/dark cycle (LD, 12:12; 300 lux light phase intensity) or
an experimental light/dark cycle (LD, 12:12dLAN (0.2 lux; dark phase
intensity) for 6 weeks resulted in a 2.5-fold decrease in
latency-to-onset (time of implant to first palpable mass) and 2-fold
increase in tumor growth rates in experimental animals lacking a
nocturnal circadian melatonin signal as compared to control animals with
an intact melatonin signal. In control animals, plasma melatonin levels
were high in the mid-dark phase (183.4 12.8 pg/mL) and low (2.2 0.4
pg/mL) in mid-light phase, while they were low throughout the 24-hr
period in dLAN-exposed animals. Tumors harvested during the mid-dark
phase (2400 h) revealed that cAMP levels, Warburg effect (increased
glucose uptake and lactate production), LA uptake, 13-HODE production,
and DNA [3H]Thymidine incorporation were all significantly elevated (P
Current evidence indicates that rotating night shift workers have an
increased risk of developing breast and prostate cancers, which have been
associated with light at night (LAN)-induced circadian disruption as the
principal risk factor. Previously, we demonstrated that animal room dark
phase light contamination with as little as 0.20 lux (0.08 W/cm2)
suppressed the nocturnal production of the circadian oncostatic
neurohormone melatonin and stimulated human breast tumor growth and
metabolism. The circadian melatonin signal suppresses tumor growth and
metabolism via an MT1 melatonin receptor-mediated signaling mechanism
involving inhibition of aerobic glycolysis (Warburg effect) and linoleic
acid (LA) uptake and conversion to the mitogen 13-hydroxyoctadecadienoic
acid (13-HODE) culminating in down-regulation of the epidermal growth
factor and insulin-like growth factor-1 pathways. We developed a new
tissue-isolated androgen-receptor positive (AR+), castration-sensitive
VCaP prostate tumor model in adult male athymic nude rats
(Crl:NIH-Foxn1rnu), to test the hypothesis that nocturnal melatonin
levels inhibit, while dim LAN (dLAN)-induced suppression of nocturnal
melatonin production stimulates, tumor signaling, metabolic and growth
activity. VCaP xenograft-bearing rats (n = 6/group) maintained on either
a control light/dark cycle (LD, 12:12; 300 lux light phase intensity) or
an experimental light/dark cycle (LD, 12:12dLAN (0.2 lux; dark phase
intensity) for 6 weeks resulted in a 2.5-fold decrease in
latency-to-onset (time of implant to first palpable mass) and 2-fold
increase in tumor growth rates in experimental animals lacking a
nocturnal circadian melatonin signal as compared to control animals with
an intact melatonin signal. In control animals, plasma melatonin levels
were high in the mid-dark phase (183.4 12.8 pg/mL) and low (2.2 0.4
pg/mL) in mid-light phase, while they were low throughout the 24-hr
period in dLAN-exposed animals. Tumors harvested during the mid-dark
phase (2400 h) revealed that cAMP levels, Warburg effect (increased
glucose uptake and lactate production), LA uptake, 13-HODE production,
and DNA [3H]Thymidine incorporation were all significantly elevated (P <
0.001) in dLAN as compared with the controls. Signaling pathways AKT,
MEK, ERK , STAT3, GSK3, and NF were all phospho-activated along with
increased expression of Aldo-keto reductase family 1 member C3 (AKR1C3)
under dLAN conditions. AKR1C3 has been associated with intratumoral
androgen synthesis and the development of castration-resistance. These
findings are the first to show that the nocturnal melatonin signal
inhibits, while dLAN stimulates the Warburg effect, LA metabolism and
growth activity, signaling activity and AKR1C3 expression in VCaP human
androgen-sensitive prostate cancer.

