Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Digital sorting and single-cell genomic profile comparison of lung
adenocarcinoma CTCs between EpCAM and size-based enrichment methods


IntroductionSeveral methods are currently available for Circulating Tumor
Cells (CTCs) enrichment. Many studies compared CTC counts between
FDA-approved CellSearch system (based on EpCAM enrichment) and size-based
selection methods. However, little is known about genomic differences
across CTCs obtained from different platforms. For the first time, we
report here a genomic characterization of copy-number and sequence
variants in single CTCs enriched with different methods from the same
patient.MethodsPeripheral blood (PB) and FFPE tissue from a pelvis bone
metastasis were collected from an advanced lung adenocarcinoma patient,
treated with cisplatin-pemetrexed-necitumumab as first line therapy and
with carboplatin-gentamicin as second-line. Two PB samples were collected
at the same time: one was enriched with CellSearch System, and one with
Parsortix PR1 (size-based selection), followed by Cytokeratin-APC,
CD45-PerCp and DAPI staining.Both samples were analyzed with DEPArray
system and single CTCs along with single WBCs as controls, were
isolated.Collected cells were whole genome amplified with Ampli1 WGA kit
and their Genome Integrity Index (GII) was assessed. On IonTorrent PGM
Platform, we profiled Genome-wide copy-number alterations (CNA) by
low-pass whole-genome sequencing with Ampli1 LowPass Kit, and analyzed
cancer-gene sequence variants with Ampli1 CHP Custom Beta targeted
panel.FFPE tissue was disaggregated down to single-cell suspension and
labelled with Keratin and Vimentin to distinguish tumor from stromal
cells. Aliquots of pure cells were recovered with DEPArray system; the
analysis of CNVs and mutations on tissue-derived samples is in
progress.ResultsSingle CTCs (CK+, CD45-,DAPI), showing GII3, either
isolated from CellSearch-enriched or PR1-enriched blood, along with WBC,
were selected for NGS.Ampli1 LowPass Kit data showed several aberrations
confirming tumor origin of all CTCs, while WBCs (n = 6) produced balanced
profiles. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering segregated PR1-derived (n
= 6) from CellSearch-derived (n = 4) single CTCs in two separate
branches. PR1-derived CTCs were very similar to each other, whereas
CellSearch-derived CTCs were more heterogeneous, although certain
aberrations were common to all CTCs across platforms. At the sequence
level, the targeted panel revealed somatic mutations shared by all CTCs
(FLT3), a PTPN11 subclonal mutation (in 3/6 PR1 and 1/4 CellSearch), and
other private mutations in single CTCs.DiscussionThe combination of
low-pass whole-genome sequencing and targeted sequencing on single-CTCs
sorted from PB enriched with different platforms reveals genetic
similarities and diversities.Integration of results with genetic analysis
of pure tumor cells isolated from the tumor tissue, will provide further
insight of tumor diversity in different compartments.

